Student Handbook
I am glad to welcome you to USIU. Your USIU experience will help you to explore your
field of study in depth, learn the inter-relationship among fields of knowledge, prepare
for a professional life and acquire the skills necessary for lifelong learning. USIU is
committed not only to your academic growth but also to your social and cultural growth.
We have a dynamic co-curriculum environment offering you activities that will
complement your learning and encourage lasting friendships from around the world.
We believe that USIU provides an excellent ground to gain a global perspective, a
multicultural understanding, and a multinational appreciation. Whether in the
classroom or in the cafeteria, in the hostels or in the library, you will come to meet and
treasure people and cultures. Citizens of the world must not only learn to value but to
celebrate human differences and that is what you will acquire being a member of the
USIU community.
Determining your future is a challenging responsibility in this fast changing world. By
joining USIU you have taken a big step toward responding to this challenge and setting a
foundation for your career. We are dedicated to offering you the academic and social
tools needed to successfully live, work and lead in the 21st Century.
So please participate, get involved and study hard. You will get a foundation and an
experience that will last a lifetime.
Freida A. Brown, Ph.D.
Vice Chancellor
1
Student Handbook
1.0 ORGANISATION
1.1 VICE CHANCELLOR'S OFFICE
United States International University is a university that can take you to many different
parts of the world, not only academically, but also socially. USIU has relationships with
campuses in different parts of the world. As a student of USIU, you have the opportunity
to transfer and experience firsthand the rich cultures and heritage of the countries where
USIU has student exchange programs.
The Vice Chancellor at USIU, Nairobi in conjunction with the management council
administers University matters. The council comprises of the Vice Chancellor, the
Deputy Vice Chancellors, and the Directors of Institutional Planning & Development,
Information Technology and Operations. The university Board of Trustees overseas the
long-range direction of the university.
The Vice Chancellors Office is located in the Administration Block and can be reached
on extension 411. Fax services are also offered at a charge through this office.
1.2 FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION OFFICE
1.2.1. The Finance Office
The Finance Office is located in the Administration block and can be reached on
extension 403 or 224.
1.2.2 Payments of Fees
Note: NO cash payments are accepted in the Finance Office, be it for transport,
transcript, application fees, boarding fees or others. However, as a special concession by
USIU, amounts not above 1000 shillings may be paid in cash at the finance office, for
items like library fines.
NOTE: An interest of 1.5% per month will be charged on outstanding student balances
until they are paid.
The following are the acceptable modes of payment.
2
a) Checks
All check payments should be made payable to United States International
University Nairobi. The same can be paid to the cashiers at the finance office.
Please note that bounced cheques will be charged a penalty of 10% of the face
value of the check to a maximum charge of Kshs.5, 000 (five thousand). The
minimum and maximum amount shall be reviewed periodically depending on the
bank charges for returned cheques. Kindly ensure that funds are sufficient in your
account to avoid embarrassment and inconvenience.
b) Bank Deposits
Cash or cheques should be deposited into the following bank accounts, after
which the student should bring the deposit slips to the finance office for receipting
within 24 Hours. Deposits are recognized as paid when receipted at the university
cash office:
ACCOUNT NAME: USIU or U.S. International University
COMMERCIAL BANK OF AFRICA LTD., UPPER HILL BRANCH
Kshs. Account Number: 6438840014
US Dollar Account Number: 6462210014
----------------------------------------------
I. THE CO-OPERATIVE BANK OF KENYA LTD., CO-OP HOUSE
BRANCH
Kshs. Account Number: 0112002134100
----------------------------------------------
II. STANDARD CHARTERED BANK KENYA LTD., KENYATTA
AVENUE BRANCH
Kshs. Account Number: 0104023439700
-----------------------------------------
The above three banks have customised USIU deposit slips with the account name and
numbers shown at ALL their branches. Deposit slips for monies deposited in the bank
accounts should be presented to th
3
a) Wire Transfers
1. Commercial Bank Of Africa Ltd., Upper Hill Branch, Mara & Ragati Roads,
P.O. Box 30437-00100,
Nairobi, Kenya.
Kshs. Account Number: 6438840014
US Dollar Account Number: 6462210014
Account Name: USIU or U.S. International University
SWIFT Code: CBAFKENX
Intermediary Bank: HSBC, New York
SWIFT Code (Intermediary bank): MRMDUS33
Routing Number: 021001088
2. The Co-operative Bank of Kenya Ltd.
Main Branch, Co-operative House, Nairobi
Current Account No. 01120002134100
3. Standard Chartered Bank of Kenya
Kenyatta Avenue branch
Current Account No. 0104023439700
b) Cell phone-M-PESA and Zap
For payments by Zap, the ‘nickname’ is USIU and the ‘Reference’ is the student ID
For M- 516900 while the ‘account number’ is the student
ID and Names.
c) Credit and Debit cards
JCB Card, Master Card, Visa Card and Visa Electron (debit card) card payments to be
made direct to our cashiers at the finance office
d) Payment of fees in instalments
4
The credit control and student accounts offices in the finance office are charged with the
responsibility of organising deferred payment plans for students.
The following are the rules regarding deferred payment.
 Payment plan for students who pay fees in instalments should be done within the
1st two weeks of the semester with the credit control office in finance department.
 Payment of fees by instalment is allowed for Kenyan students only, who should
not be first-time freshmen.
 In order to be on a payment plan the student must produce authentic photocopies
of the following documents:
I. A current bank statement or pay slip of sponsor
II. Water or electricity bill
III. PIN certificate
IV. National ID Card/Passport of sponsor
 If you are self sponsored, the above documents should be in your name.
 Every student should make sure that he/she gets financial clearance within the
first two weeks of the semester in order to attend and be recognized as student for
that semester.
1.2.3 Other services offered by the Finance Office to students include:
 Maintenance of student accounts.
 Financial clearance for students.
 Receipt and bank money received from students.
 Processing of caution money and tuition refunds for students who have
graduated.
 Process payments incurred by USIU.
 Provide accounts for audit.
 Offer purchasing functions for acquiring goods and service e.g. Purchase of sports
equipment and other related services.
1.3 CAFETERIA SERVICES
Located in the university compound, the cafeteria offers diversified meals.
5
Meals are on PAYE or meal plan basis. Students are advised to make their choice
carefully as changes after the choice is made will not be accepted.
Meal hours in the cafeteria are as follows:
BREAKFAST:
Day Time
Monday - Saturday 7:30 am - 9:30 am
Sunday 9:30 am - 2:00 pm
LUNCH:
Day Time
Monday- Saturday 12.00 - 3:00 pm
Sunday 12:00 - 2:00 pm
Snacks available Sunday 2:00 pm - 6:00 pm
after lunch
DINNER:
Day Time
Monday - Saturday 7:00 pm - 9:30 pm
Sunday 6:30 pm - 8:30 pm
6
SNACK BAR:
Day Time
Monday- Thursday 10.00am - 8.00pm
Friday - Saturday 10.00am - 6.00pm
* After 6.00 pm on Saturdays, snacks are transferred
to the restaurant
N.B: The Sunday hours are applicable to all Public Holidays as well
The Restaurant Upstairs is open for lunch from 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m. Monday to
Thursday for the entire university community. Those who are in a hurry and wish to
avoid the long queues downstairs will particularly find this service useful. A small
surcharge is levied to discourage overcrowding.
Other Services
Student groups or organizations that need cafeteria services outside the normal schedules
will need to arrange for them through their respective Student affairs staff and student
leaders at latest five days before the date of use
Cafeteria Regulations
done so will be subject to disciplinary sanctions
After eating at the Cafeteria, you are expected to return your used dishes and utensils to
the carts. Messy tables are unpleasant for those who follow you. Our cafeteria is self-
service and the university does not provide waiters to clean up after you. It is prohibited
to take utensils away from the cafeteria. Food from outside is not allowed in the
cafeteria.
Misuse of the cafeteria facility including but not limited to any fraudulent acts, refusal to
pay, underpayment or misrepresentation constitute a breach of the student code of
conduct.
7
Students are not allowed to use other students Identity Cards (IDs) to buy food from the
Cafeteria. Severe disciplinary sanctions will be imposed for any breach of cafeteria or
other university regulations.
You can reach the Cafeteria on Extensions 302, 208, 293
NB: Smoking is NOT Allowed In the Cafeteria or anywhere On Campus
1.4 TRANSPORT
USIU has two transport services; one for staff and faculty and the other, a contracted
transport for students who pay for it. The students can use the contracted transport at a
fee payable directly to the Transport Company. The Transport Company has offices on
campus next to the USIU transport office. Students (including those on internship
assignments) are NOT allowed to use transport allocated to staff and faculty.
Field and sports trips are organised through the re
transport is co-ordinated through the Housing Office.
Transport schedules are prepared at the beginning of each semester by the transport
office. Similarly, the contracted transport company works in consultation with the
Student Government (SAC) to prepare transport schedules based on the academic
timetables.
There will be no university transport during university vacation time. This permits
drivers to take vacation and buses to be maintained. For further information, call the
transport office on extensions 273 or 584 or the contracted transport company on
extension 228.
1.5 CAMPUS SAFETY
1.5.1 Campus Security
The university Head of Security has an office at the Maintenance area opposite the
Cafeteria and can be reached on extension 583. The university also has a contacted
security and monitoring force that is on duty 24 hours a day. Students are encouraged to
report any suspicious activity to the security office. The campus head of security may
liaise with police and other law enforcement agencies in all matters of security concern. In
case of any emergencies you can call extension 266 or 461 for assistance.
The University has zero tolerance on theft and drug crimes.
8
Lost items should be handed over to the Administration block Security desk for recording
and taken to the office of the Head of Security for safe custody where the owners will
claim them. Inquiries on lost items should be made at the same Security desk
Car Park
security stickers for parking eligibility. No car
shall be left parked on campus overnight without permission from the security office.
Resident students with cars should seek security clearance for overnight parking.
Motorists are requested to adhere to the Campus speed limit of 10KPH.
Photos and Videos
Photo taking and/or video filming of the campus is prohibited except for academic
purposes with permission of the lecturer.
1.5.2 Campus Crime
If you experience or witness a crime, report it to the DVC, Student Affairs, Director of
Operations, Dean of Students or Head of Security. A victim who reports a crime to such
campus authorities may request anonymity to the extent practicable and permitted by
local law.
Professionals at the Counselling and Health Centre (extension 229 or 311) are available to
help you cope if you become the victim of a crime.
1.5.3 Guidelines to Protect Yourself and Your Possessions
By being aware, you can reduce the likelihood of becoming a victim. Familiarize yourself
with the Sexual Assault Policy, the Drug and Alcohol Prevention Information located in
this Handbook. Attend security awareness, drug and alcohol prevention programs which
are presented by USIU throughout the year.
You must also take responsibility of all your personal belongings by ensuring that you do
not leave them un-attended while on campus.
1.5.4 Guidelines for Fire Safety
 Do not overload electrical outlets or extension cords.
 Never smoke in bed or anywhere on campus!
 Never go back into a burning building!
 Plan escape routes. Remember that during a fire you may not be able to rely on
lights and the main exit may be unusable.
9
 Know the location of fire extinguishers.
Caution: use extinguishers only for small fires that don't involve great risk.
Note: It is against Kenyan law to tamper with or illegally discharge a fire extinguisher.
Once a fire starts, get out of the building, alert the nearest administration officer and call
the fire department from a neighbour's phone or public phone.
If you suspect fire on the other side of a door, feel the door near the top. If it is hot, do
not open it. If you think it is safe, brace your shoulder against the door and open it
cautiously. Be prepared to slam it if smoke or heat rush in.
Because toxic fumes and high temperatures usually fill the higher levels of air, it is best to
crawl out of a burning building. Cover your face with a cloth, preferably damp.
If fire alarm goes off, you are to immediately leave the building to an assembly point
without panic.
1.6 ALUMNI OFFICE
The Alumni Association, whose full name is United States International University
Alumni Association Africa, has its office located in the main administration block of
USIU. The Association is a registered society as of April 1990 and is governed by Nine
Executive Committee Members appointed in its Annual General Meeting.
All graduating students are required to register with the alumni office where further
information will be provided to them on the role of the alumni in relation to the
development of the association and the general university. Currently, registration to the
Alumni Association is centralized on campus.
You are required to register with the Alumni office at the end of your program. It is very
important that you leave the alumni office with your proper forwarding contacts updated.
Notify the Alumni office whenever you change your country of residence, your job or
your address through the email address: alumni@usiu.ac.ke
The Alumni are required to pay stipulated fees to the Business Office before they can be
allowed to use any of the University facilities. Those wishing to utilize the university
Library facilities are required to pay Library fees as well as the alumni membership fee.
Your Alumni membership is renewable every year.
10
The Alumni office can be reached on extension 585, 205 or 206.
1.7 HUMAN RESOURCES OFFICE
The Human resources Office, found on the first floor of the Administration Block, is
responsible for employment and other related issues.
Student grievances against staff will be dealt with as per section 2.5 of this handbook.
The Human Resource Office is on extension 408.
1.7.1 Health Services
Since physical and emotional support is necessary for intellectual growth, our students
benefit from complete health services and counselling services. The Health Centre is
located next to the Hostels on Ext. 542/230 or 229 and the Counselling Center located in
the Psychology Block, Ext. 311 or 297.
The Health Center is open for 24 hours as specified below:
 8.00 a.m. to 10 p.m. All students
 10.00 p.m. to 8 a.m. Resident students only. (Emergency Cases)
Closed on public holidays & when school is not in session
1.7.2 Health Services offered:
Curative services:
 Clinical diagnosis and treatment of different ailments
 Dispensing prescriptions
 Minor surgery e.g. stitching of cuts, dressing of wounds, ear syringing etc.
1.7.3 Other Services:
 Providing preventive care to students, staff and sports teams
 Health counselling
 Vaccination
 First aid training and first Aid Kits
1.7.4 Medical Insurance
11
All fully registered students are insured against accidents and injuries that could lead to
temporary, permanent disability or death. The scheme is operational when students are
travelling to and from campus and during sports events within or outside the campus.
All students have a maximum medical cover of up to Ksh.200, 000 for accident related
injuries. The cover is on reimbursement basis for non sporting students while the
university makes direct payments for sports related injuries incurred by those enrolled in
sports
All enrolled students are compensated for up to Kshs.500, 000 in case of a fatal accident
or death.
All International students and those residing in the university hostels MUST have a valid
medical insurance which is applicable for use in Kenyan hospitals; those who have their
own should submit proof at the health centre and will be exempted from paying the
medical insurance fee.
1.7.5 Procedures
If injured while on campus you should immediately report to the USIU Health Centre for
first aid and completion of the Personal Accident Claim Form (1) obtained in the centre.
Those outside campus should seek medical treatment from a recognised facility and later
within the same week pick claim forms from the Health Centre. The forms should be
duly executed by both the claimant, (the injured), and the medical Doctor, or
Physiotherapist in case conventional medical treatment is not desirable for the particular
case. The said forms should then be returned to the health centre and where applicable
with the original medical bills within 14 days from the actual date of injury.
1.7.6 Caution
Where a student is injured and seeks treatment but fails to complete the prescribed forms
(Claim Forms and upon completion of treatment submit medical Doctor Report), all
medical charges incurred by the University shall be charged to the student account within
30 days of such injury.
For further clarification on effect/implications, and eligibility of available insurance
schemes please call the HR Director on Ext 408 or the Health Services Coordinator on
extensions 542/229 or 230.
12
NOTE: It is advisable for student leaving away from their parents or guardians to take a
health Insurance cover. The Health Centre does not operate as a hospital and is
accessible to day students only during working hours
1.8 INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
1.8.1 The Mission
The mission of the ICT Department is to collaborate with the university community to
lead the advancement of scholarship through the appropriate integration of technology.
In doing so, we seek to empower our students, faculty and staff to use information
technology to promote life-long learning for the benefit of humankind and apply that
knowledge for the development of our surrounding community. We recognize ICT as a
tool that enables you to create, learn, explore, teach, increase productivity, solve
problems, and go wherever your curiosity and imagination may lead.
1.8.2 Access to ICT Facilities
All students who are financially cleared AND have paid computer lab fees are eligible to
enjoy ICT Services. The ONLY exception is IST students, since this charge has been
incorporated into their fees.
1.8.3 ICT Services Available
The following is a list of the services that are available to students on campus:-
1. Access to computers during classes in the various labs in the Lillian K Beam
Building, the Library and School of Arts Block
2. Access to computers in the Main Lab for general research and assignments
3. Access to the computers in the Multimedia Area of the Library for research
4. Printing, photocopying and scanning services provided they top up their printing
accounts
5. Internet Access in the Main Lab
6. Wireless Internet Access in designated areas of the campus
7. A personal folder on the server for storing research and assignments
1.8.4 Services Available to ALL Students
13
1 Access to registration information, fee balance and grades on the ICT System called
CX (Does not require computer lab fee, but does require you to be financially
cleared)
2 Access to the e-learning platform called Blackboard (Does not require computer lab
fee, but does require you to be financially cleared)
1.8.5 List of ICT Labs Available to Students
1. Lab 1 Lab 5 in the Lillian K Beam Building
2. Software Lab
3. Hardware Lab
4. Journalism Editing Lab
5. Journalism Mac Lab 1 and 2
6. Language Lab
7. Instruction Room of the Library
8. Multimedia Area of the Library
9. Language Lab
10. General Lab
This makes for a total of 15 ICT Labs in total
1.8.6 ICT support services are available by:-
1. Calling Ext 333 which goes directly to the ICT Call Center, or +254 20 3606 333 if
you are calling from outside the campus.
2. Sending an email to helpdesk@usiu.ac.ke. This must come from your official USIU
Gmail account.
Multimedia services are available by sending an email to multimedia@usiu.ac.ke and
booking of facilities must occur 48 hours before the expected function.
1.8.7 Computer Lab Regulations
1. Only students who meet the criteria set out in Section 5.2 should enter the labs.
Students who access services contrary to these rules will face disciplinary action
2. Time in the lab is supervised by faculty and supervisors who are responsible for
assisting and ensuring that equipment is safeguarded.
14
3. Students should always show their ID Card with the appropriate sticker in place to
security personnel every time they enter these facilities.
4. Students are not permitted to play GAMES or do personal work in the labs. These
are strictly for research and assignments.
5. Pirating of software, music, videos and any other electronic information is not
allowed.
6. Students are not allowed to modify any application or delete any system/application
file.
7. Students are not allowed to move equipment out of any Lab
8. Foods and drinks are not allowed in the Computer Labs
9. Students should not make noise or cause disturbance in the Lab premises.
10. Fraudulent, harassing or obscene messages and or materials are not to be sent,
printed, requested, displayed, or stored within the USIU computing system.
Any student found in contravention of these rules will face disciplinary actions.
1.8.8 Data Security and Ethics
The university employs various measures to protect the security of its computing
Users should be aware that the university cannot
guarantee such security. Users should therefore engage in "safe computing" practices by
establishing appropriate access restrictions for their accounts, guarding their passwords if
necessary, and changing them regularly.
1. Data transfer on the University network should be for business purposes only
research and assignments
2. All data should be scanned for viruses and other malware before being used, saved
or transferred on the university network
3. Transmission of harassing, discriminatory or otherwise objectionable E-mail or
files (as determined by the recipient) is strictly prohibited.
4. s without their
consent is strictly prohibited.
5. Access to ICT Services is provided initially using standard passwords. Protect your
password and change it immediately upon activation and when you suspect it has
been compromised.
6. Students will be held responsible for all activities that occur using their credentials.
15
7. Data files pertaining to assignments and research
home directory commonly called a z:\ folder.
8. Data in the z:\ folder is backed up by ICT on a daily basis.
9. Students should not save data onto local hard drives since these could fail and be
formatted or replaced without notice
10. Information in the z:\ folder is cleaned out at the end of EVERY semester and
students are responsible for taking their information off site
11. Files that do not conform to University policy e.g. music, videos, games, may be
periodically deleted by the antivirus from z:\ folders
Users should be aware that university computing resources are intended to support our
core business learning and research. These can be queried routinely or when the need
arises to establish patterns, accountability and responsibility for activities that place the
University at risk.
1.8.9 Use of Personal Computers
1. All personal computers using ICT Facilities on the campus should be registered
with the ICT Department
2. Personal Computers should be presented to security personnel for inspection upon
request and signed in and out of various buildings
3. Personal Computers accessing the wireless network MUST have licensed software
and a current, up to date antivirus running
4. Personal Computers are not allowed into the teaching labs and can only be plugged
in at the General Lab in the designated section
5. Students will be held responsible for exposing the University network to ICT risks
through their equipment.
6. Personal Computers should not be used for making profits, personal gain or in any
way that is likely to compromise the University mission.
2.0 THE DIVISION OF ACADEMIC AFFAIRS
USIU offers challenging programs that will open your mind to new ideas and also stretch
your imagination. We offer a multicultural perspective that permeates everything we do,
preparing you to live in our global society. Our commitment to you is to help you master
the skills necessary for a successful career of your choice, and to encourage you to
embrace lifelong learning. USIU classes emphasize discussion and interaction. Our
16
experienced faculty will help you every step of the way. Additionally, there are many
resources on campus to enhance your classroom experiences, including a comprehensive
library and computer labs.
The Deputy Vice Chancellor, Academic Affairs (DVCAA), is responsible for the
Academic Affairs Division. The division comprises the Chandaria School of Business
(CSB), the School of Humanities and Social Sciences (SHSS), School of Science and
Technology, and the Library. The schools are headed by the Deans. The DVCAA can be
reached on ext. 406/407. The Deans can be reached on ext. 433/434 (SHSS) and on
415/414 (CSB)
2.1 Academic Program Administrators (APAs) and Academic Advisors (AAs)
Stop by the Academic Program Administrators' Offices to pick up an academic schedule
and to meet your academic advisor. Students are assigned to advisors based on their
program of study. There are two advisors for the Chandaria School of Business and two
for the School of Humanities and Social Sciences. You will meet with your advisors
regularly while you are at USIU. Group course advising sessions are held once a semester
for students to review their progress. Individual course advising sessions are also available
throughout the semester.
Consult your advisors about establishing realistic goals and an educational master plan
for your studies. AAs offer the following services:
 Degree requirements and course advising. Group course advising sessions are
held once a semester for students to review their progress. Individual course
advising sessions are also available throughout the semester.
 Academic schedules.
 Guidance on major and minor program changes, and adding and dropping of
courses.
 Registration. We can plan out a course of study based on your individual
needs and interests. For example, need to work on Monday evening? Do you
have soccer practice on Thursday afternoon? No problem, we'll work out a
class schedule that will ensure your college success.
 Substitution of courses / Academic exceptions
 Transfer credits approval
 Independent study approval
Your academic program administrators can be reached on ext. 226 (HSS) and 418 (CBS).
Your advisors can be reached on ext. 336,185 (HSS) and 504/171 (CBS).
17
2.2 A Short Guide on Common Academic Terms
Course Load: At undergraduate level, the normal full time course load during an
academic semester is 12 units (four courses of three units each). To be considered a full
time student, an undergraduate must be enrolled for at least 9 units. At graduate level,
the normal full time course load during an academic semester is 9 units. To be
considered a full time student, a graduate student must be enrolled in at least 6 units. For
more information on course load and acceleration (course load in excess of normal load)
please refer to the University Catalogue.
Unit: A unit is an academic credit that is equal to the amount of hours per week that a
student will spend in class. Most classes are three units of credit per semester; therefore,
the class meets twice a week for two-hour sessions. It is expected that the student will be
assigned two hours of non-classroom study for every hour s/he spends in class.
Class levels:
 Freshmen: Students who are entering the university with fewer than 29
semester units of credit.
 Sophomores: Students with at least 30 semester units of credit but fewer than
59 semester units of college credit.
 Juniors: Students with at least 60 semester units of college credit but fewer
than 89 semester units of college credit.
 Seniors: Students with 90 or more semester units of college credit.
Student Academic Performance: Students are expected to keep their academic
performance above average; for an undergraduate student, a GPA of not less than 2.0 is
expected and a graduate student is expected to have a GPA of not less than 3.00. Failure
to maintain standards will result tanding changing from Good to
a Warning letter followed by a Probation letter in the consecutive semester. If
improvement is still not made in the following semester, the student will receive a letter of
Dismissal. Students who are academically dismissed may appeal their cases to the dean or
designee ten (10) working days from the date of the letter. Students should always check
their academic standing on- line
Absenteeism: Students are expected to attend all classes. Upon being absent from five
classes, in a three-unit course, the instructor will give a student an "F" grade for the
course. If you have to be absent, please contact your instructor in advance. You are
18
responsible for any course work due on the day of your return to class and any course
work missed while absent, if you miss classes because of sickness, you need to provide an
official verification (stamp, signature and address) from a doctor.
Graduation: All undergraduate and graduate students must make a formal application
for graduation by the deadline date listed in the Academic calendar of the academic year
in which they expect to complete degree requirements. The commencement ceremony is
held once a year.
Honours: Graduating seniors who achieve the requisite cumulative grade point average
during their undergraduate career will be entitled to graduate with honours. The
university recognises the following honours categories:
 Cum Laude 3.50 - 3.69
 Magna Cum Laude 3.70 - 3.89
 Summa Cum Laude 3.90 - 4.00
The cumulative grade point average is computed by considering all the college work
attempted at USIU plus any other college attended.
For more details on academic policies, rules, terms and other facts, please consult the
USIU Catalogue.
2.3 The USIU Gazette
This is a newspaper entirely researched, reported and produced by USIU journalism
students. It appears once every semester and welcomes student articles, letters to the
editor, contributions /comments on topical issues, matters of concern to students and
relevant sports news.
For further information about the "USIU Gazette/Sauti Magazine" please see a member
of the student editorial board in their offices located at Dr. Lillian K. Beam Bldg (ICT
Centre), 1st Floor, Content Creation Room
2.4 The University Library and Information Center
The United States International University Library operates and functions within the
overall mission of the University of promoting research, teaching and application of
knowledge in a multi-diversity and rapidly developing technological environment. It has
a seating capacity of 1200.
19
2.4.1 Study Carrels
A mixture of small and large study rooms destined to promote collaborative learning are
available on the first and second floors of the library. Three of the study carrels on the
first floor are fitted with audiovisual viewing/listening workstations. Head phones are
provided to ensure quiet listening.
website will help you locate and use the wide variety of information
resources available in the library. The librarians and staff are knowledgeable and eager to
help you in your search for information.
2.4.2 Library Resources
 The Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC
including: books, audiovisual materials and journal titles.
 Web Based Databases such as EBSCO host. Use these resources to find articles in
journals, magazines and newspapers.
 Audio Visual Facilities use: CD-ROMS, audiocassettes, videocassettes, and online
databases for your research needs.
 Course Texts meet your core readings needs in your specific area of study. These are
loaned to students and faculty for an entire semester.
 American Studies Collection promotes a thorough understanding of the United
States of America. The collection covers the areas of architecture, art, business,
cultural studies, drama, economic, education, geography, gender studies, history,
international relations, and politics, journalism, labour studies, law, linguistics,
literature, music, philosophy, poetry, psychology, religion, science and sociology. The
collection is open to the academic and research community in the East and Central
Africa region. Materials may be made through copying limited pages at a nominal
charge to other interested parties.
 Africana Collection promotes works by African authors as well as works about
Africa. This collection provides readership and research content for those patrons
who have an appreciation for this collection.
 U.N. Collection includes documentations of and about the UN and its role by the
global body in all aspects of humanity. This collection is intended to equip the
International Relations program, environmental studies and others and give a broader
appreciation of the role of the UN in the international arena.
 Short Loan Collection provides most books, periodicals and articles in heavy
demand, USIU student projects and staff papers. Materials are loaned for 2 hours.
20
 Inter-Library Loan Service is normally used to obtain material not available in the
library from other local libraries. Requests should be handed to the User Services
Librarian. A charge may be made to meet photocopying expenses, if any. Users, who
may wish to use another library, may request for a letter of introduction from the
User Services Librarian.
 Photocopying Services are provided through a card-operated photocopier.
 Notice Board keeps you informed of the latest developments in the library and any
other announcements.
2.4.3 Library Rules and Regulations
 Admission
The following persons are allowed to use the library:-
 All registered students of the University.
 All members of faculty, administrative, technical and other staff.
 All alumni at an Annual charge of Ksh.5000.
 Access
All members of the university community should gain access to the library through
the biometric system.
All users must abide by the following regulations failure to that will face disciplinary
action.
 Discipline
1. Good order and silence shall be maintained in ALL Library areas including study
carrels at all times. * Repeated offences will be referred to the Disciplinary Committee.
2. Sleeping in the library is prohibited. *
3. Food and drinks or any other materials that will accidentally damage library property,
will not be brought into the library.*
4. Booking of seats in the library is prohibited.*
5. Use of communication devices in the library including mobile phones is prohibited*
6. The marking, defacing or mutilation of any library material including audiovisual
material is strictly prohibited.
7. Attempted theft/theft/stealing of library materials is prohibited.
8. Obtaining or using a Library card under false pretences is not allowed
9. Removal of computer components including mice, cables etc. from one computer to
another is not permitted
10. Behaviour which adversely impacts on other individuals' use or access to Library
facilities and resources is not allowed *
21
11. Discussion in the library open area is prohibited.*
12. Moving of seats from one table to the other is prohibited.*
13. All readers leaving the library in possession of books, papers, bags and overcoats must
show them to the Library security at the exit point.*
14. Re-shelving of materials used within the library is prohibited. Materials used should
be left on the tables or un-shelved books shelves*
15. Loaned items may not be transferred from one borrower to another but must be
returned to the library and formally re-issued.*
16. Items not returned within the loan period shall be subject to fines. *
17. If a lost/damaged item has to be replaced, the cost of the item shall be doubled. *
18. Photocopying of more than 10% of any document is punishable under the copyright
law of the country.
19. Time allowed for usage of the library must be observed. After the second bell every
library user should be on their way out.*
20. No visitor will be allowed to tour, use library facilities except with express permission
of the University Librarian.
21. All the newspapers from the periodical area must be read within the periodical
section*
22. Any acts that violate essence of University Library policy.
Please note that this list is not necessarily exhaustive. The University Librarian will
handle the infractions marked with an asterisk (*). Other violations will be handled as
per the Student Code of Ethics in the Student Handbook. Violations of these
regulations (marked with asterisks) will attract a warning or probation level I as may
be appropriate. Repeated violations will be referred to the Disciplinary Committee.
 Borrowing (General)
 All library materials including audiovisual materials may be borrowed with the
exception of reference works, periodicals, press cuttings, American Collection,
Africana collections, UN collections and materials in great demand placed
temporarily on short loan.
 Borrowers are held personally responsible for the safe custody of any materials on
loan to them. They shall be required to pay the cost of replacement of any item,
which is lost while on loan to them.
 Borrowers shall also be liable to pay compensation as may be fixed by the University
Librarian for any damage on any items while on loan to them.
 Loans of any Library material to other libraries may be allowed at the discretion of the
University Librarian.
22
 Library material borrowed from other libraries is subject to the conditions of the
lending library.
 The Senior Librarian, User Services is empowered to decline to issue any particular
item or items or to restrict their circulation.
 Period of Loan
 Faculty may borrow fifteen (15) circulating books for a month.
 All items on loan must be returned at the end of every semester and may only
be renewed by re-issue.
 Undergraduate and graduate students may borrow ten (10) circulating books
for a period of two (2) weeks.
 Alumni may borrow two (2)circulating books for a period of two(2) weeks
 Short loan Collection
 Fines of Kshs.5.00 per hour shall be levied on any borrower in the case of
items returned late to the Short Loan Collection.
 Fines of Kshs.50.00 per day per audiovisual material such as video cassettes
shall be levied on borrowers who delay with such items.
 Fines
Circulating Books
 Books required by another reader will be recalled and must be returned within
(7) days. Failure to do so will necessitate fines being charged at a rate of
Kshs.3.00 per day.
 Inter Library Loan
 Items not returned within two days of date due or recall shall be subject to
fines:-
- Audio visual material Kshs.120.00 per day
- Others Kshs. 10.00 per day
 If a lost or damaged item has to be replaced, the cost of the item shall be
doubled.
 Sanctions
All persons registered to use the Library are required to abide by the regulations of
the Library.
23
The University Librarian or Designee will impose penalties for breach of any of the
regulations below. In addition to this, he/she may also file formal complaints to the
University Hearing Officer in accordance with the student Code of Ethics and
procedures in the Student Handbook. Depending on the seriousness of the offence,
the University Librarian or designee may also suspend from the use of the Library any
person who violates Library Regulations pending action by the Hearing Officer.
Note: Make sure you read your library regulations and other library brochures. More
information is provided for on the USIU website.
24
LIBRARY & INFORMATION CENTER
Library information skills
Library instructional services enable library users to acquire skills on how to use the
online public access catalogue (OPAC), the basics of effective information searching and
how to access the library online databases.
Library Information: Hours
Opening hours depend on the day of the week and time of the year, i.e. whether during
term time or vacation.
During the Semester
Monday Friday 8.15 a.m. - 9.00 p.m.
Saturday 9.00 a.m. - 6.00 p.m.
Sunday 11.00 a.m. - 5.00 p.m.
25
Vacation
Monday Friday 8.15 a.m. - 5.00 p.m.
Saturday CLOSED
Sunday CLOSED
Public Holidays CLOSED
If you need help or have any questions, please ask at the information desk or contact the
librarians by e-mail either asklibrarian@usiu.ac.ke or library@usiu.ac.ke. You may also
call EXT. 254, 294, 371, 364 252, or 314.
3.0 THE DIVISION OF STUDENT AFFAIRS
The Division of Student Affairs and Enrolment Management is committed to providing a
supportive learning environment that will ensure the all-round development of students
through planned student welfare and activities programs as well as academic support
services. The Deputy Vice Chancellor, Student Affairs and Enrolment Management
(DVCSA) is the head of the division.
Every student who attends USIU will have the opportunity to learn, enhance and develop
many interests and talents. The DVCSA is the Student Affairs Council (SAC) advisor and
together with a committed team of staff from Student Affairs, works closely with SAC and
other student leaders to facilitate and help enhance student leadership skills and
knowledge, the identification of their talents and uniqueness and the exploration of the
vast range of opportunities in the university. The DVCSA is the liaison between the
university administration and the students through SAC.
The office of the DVCSA is located upstairs in the Administration Block and can be
reached on Ext: 436.
3.1 THE STUDENT AFFAIRS COUNCIL (SAC)
The Student Affairs Council commonly known as SAC is the student governing body at
USIU that operates in accordance with the approved constitution and in compatibility
with the philosophy and regulations of the University. All registered students are
members of the Council. SAC works with the students, faculty and administration on
activities and policies that are related to the overall well being and interest of the student
26
community. The DVC Student Affairs or designee plays an advisory role to SAC. All the
student government members are elected during the student annual general elections.
The SAC offices are located within the Student Affairs Block. You can reach the SAC
Executive on Ext. 243
3.1.1 SAC Executive Committee
The Students Affairs Council's day to day administration and activities are overseen by
five members who form the executive committee. The five members are The Chairperson,
Vice Chairperson, Executive Secretary, the Treasurer and the Assistant Secretary. The
Executive Committee works closely with the Academic, Welfare and Graduate
Representatives and together, they constitute the SAC Senate.
3.1.2 Welfare Representatives
There are two SAC Welfare Representatives.
 The SAC Welfare Representative I is responsible SAC organized social events
as well as the general welfare of the students on campus as relates to such services
cafeteria, work-study, housing, health, and other campus student support services
and may offer support in the event of illness or bereavement.
 The SAC Welfare Representative II is responsible for student transport and
communication including the outsourced transport services.
3.1.3 The Academic Representatives
The SAC Academic Representatives work in close liaison with faculty and other academic
oriented departments to address student academic concerns as well as help to plan and
/or organize various academic related events on campus. The representatives are also
responsible for academic related inter-university activities.
3.1.4 The Senate
Members of the SAC Executive, Welfare and Academic Representatives form the Senate.
The senate oversees club activities, decides on and plans the SAC budget and with the
advice of the DVC for Student Affairs, develops policies and procedures for SAC.
For more information about the student government,
please refer to the SAC constitution
27
3.1.5 USIU Clubs
SAC registers student clubs and organisations. Clubs provide a great way for students to
get positively engaged, develop leadership skills, pursue personal interests, and engage in
community service as well as form a network of friends and contacts from the various
nationalities on campus. Club officials, who are elected by club members annually,
manage clubs. SAC continuously registers clubs that meet the requirements outlined in
the Club Handbook. For a full list of registered clubs or if there is a club that you would
like to join or start, please see the Assistant SAC Secretary on Ext. 243, The Clubs
Coordinator on Ext. 173, or The Head of Student Activities on Ext. 144.
3.2.0 DEPARTMENTS IN THE STUDENT AFFAIRS DIVISION
The following departments in the division provide a wide range of services to students
and even faculty:
 The Admissions and Financial Aid Department

 The Counselling Center
 The Deans of Students and Student Activities Department
3.1 THE DEPARTMENT OF ADMISSIONS AND FINANCIAL AID
The Department of Admissions and Financial Aid is headed by the Director of
Admissions whose office is in the Admissions office, on the ground floor of the
Administration Block.
3.1.1 Admission Terms, Requirements and Procedures
1. Admission Tests
Applicants from countries where English is not the official language must present a paper
based test score of 550 or higher (213 in the computer based test or 90 in the Internet
Based Test) on the official Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL). TOEFL scores
must be current within the last two years. Applicants may also submit results of the
Cambridge Test of English Proficiency, grade C or better.
28
As appropriate, graduate applicants must submit an official record of scores from
Graduate Management Assessment Test (GMAT), or Graduate Record Exam (GRE),
which must be current within the last five years.
2. Admission Status
 Special Status/Non-Degree Applicants
Students who do not intend to earn a degree at USIU may apply to be Special
Status Degree students. A student who is classified as Special Status Non-Degree
need not necessarily meet the admissions requirements for a degree program, but
may be required to submit supporting documentation. In cases where there is
limited class space, degree-seeking students will have priority on-.
 Transfer Admission
Official evaluation of possible undergraduate transfer credit is under the authority
of the dean or designee of a school. Transfer evaluation (based on higher
education work completed from accredited institutions where grades of C or
better were earned) is carried out on a course-by-course basis. USIU does not
offer correspondence/extension courses, and does not accept credit for such
courses.
3. Re-Admission
Students who are not in continuous enrolment must apply for re-admission through the
Admissions Office and pay a non-refundable application-processing fee. Students must
apply for re-admission unless they have obtained an approved leave of absence. Leave of
absence is allowed for a maximum of one academic year (i.e. three semesters) Students
who are re-admitted will be treated as new students and the Dean will evaluate their
transcripts or designee based on current curriculum and admission requirements.
4. Returning USIU Graduates
Students who completed a degree, credential, or certificate program at USIU and wish to
be considered for another program must submit an appropriate application to the
Admissions Office and a non-refundable application-processing fee. All such
applications are expected to meet all admission requirements for the new degree
program.
All applicants into United States International University are expected to satisfy
procedures and criteria for admission, and to submit acceptable documents, which verify
29
that they have satisfactorily completed all admission requirements. Students who meet all
requirements will be considered for acceptance to the University. A non-refundable
processing fee must accompany the application. Conditionally admitted students must
present the required documents within the first Semester of study. Failure to do so will
prohibit further registration.
For more information do not hesitate to contact the Office of Admission on Ext. 218,
300, 247 or 503. You may also choose to email us on admit@usiu.ac.ke
3.1.2 The Financial Aid Office
Introduction
The United States International University (USIU) Financial Aid Office is committed to
supporting the university achieve its Vision and Mission of providing quality all round
education to a diversified population of students by promoting Scholarship and helping
students with financial need meet their tuition costs. The programs also attest to the
ciety.
The Financial Aid programs not only assist students meet their tuition fees, but also
contribute to diversity in student enrollments thereby helping students from different
nationalities and backgrounds interact. There are also those programs that help prepare
students for the world of work while others provide them with opportunities to discover
and or develop their talents.
1 General Eligibility Criteria and Policies for Financial Aid Programs
In addition to the specific criteria provided for each of the scholarships, all applicants
must meet the following criteria and abide by the policies and regulations that govern
them:
 Fulfil all the relevant financial aid application and selection procedures within the
stipulated time lines.
 Clearly specify the name of the scholarship(s) or Financial Aid program(s) they
are applying for.
 Enroll as full time students: 3 - 4 courses (9 - 12 units) for undergraduate students
and 2 - 3 courses (6 - 9 units) for graduate students
 Be of good conduct.
 Meet the academic requirements to remain eligible.
 Abide by all the requirements of the Financial Aid Programs.
30
Policy and Regulations
 Financial Aid applicants must meet admissions requirements (if new students)
 Students may apply for more than one Financial Aid program depending on
circumstances and eligibility.
 Unless specified, all USIU students who meet the required criteria are eligible to
apply for financial aid.
 Students of Kenyan nationality with financial need must show proof of having
applied for HELB funds if they qualify for the same.
 Students who apply for need based Financial Aid programs will be required to
provide all the necessary documentary evidence alongside their applications.
 Financial Aid is not refundable to students under any circumstances.
 Award of grants/ scholarships depends on availability of funds.
 All Financial Aid applicants will be notified about the status of their applications
within seven days from the date of the interview (for continuing students) or
upon admission (if new students).
 Recipients of financial aid who must maintain specified academic requirements to
remain eligible will be placed on one-semester Financial Aid Probation if their
Cumulative GPA drops below expected standards but not below a cumulative
GPA of 2.0. The financial Aid office will formally issue a letter to that effect in the
3rd week of the semester.
 Fulfillment of all the Financial Aid application requirements is not a guarantee for
the award of Aid.
 Incomplete applications will not be processed.
2 Financial Aid Programs for the Undergraduates
 Full USIU Scholarship
 Alumni Scholarship
 Freshman Scholarship for Kenyans
 International Grant for International Students (IGU)
 Sports Scholarship for freshmen
 Sports Scholarship for Continuing Students
 Diversity Scholarship

 Campus Work Opportunity (CWO)
31
 Resident Assistantship (RA)
 SAC Grant
3 Financial Aid Programs for Graduate Students
 MBAS Scholarship
 Public Service Scholarship
 Graduate Assistantship (GA)
4 Financial Aid Programs for Undergraduate and Graduate Students
 Special Need Grant
 Family Tuition Discount Award
 USIU Alumni Discount Award
5 Externally Funded Financial Aid Programs
 Rattansi Education Trust Fund Grant
 Mel Kuol Scholarships
 USAID Scholarship
 The Coca-Cola Africa Foundation Scholarship for MSc. in Executive Management
& Organizational Development (EMOD).
 Higher Education Loans Board (HELB) www.helb.co.ke
 Bank Loans Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB), National Bank of Kenya (NBK)
and Equity Bank.
Note:
The filling of an application form for financial assistance, does not guarantee that a
student will receive financial aid. Financial Aid is very limited and its receipt is
contingent upon the availability of funds and the number of students that apply for the
same in any given quarter. Some positions for CWO and GRA also require advanced
computer skills as pre-requisites.
Every applicant for Financial Aid must go through an interview process conducted by
the Financial Aid Committee, to assess each applicant's eligibility for the grant he or she
has applied for. Only those students whose applications are approved by the committee
will be awarded Financial Assistance in any given semester. In view of the above, it's
contingent upon any applicant to liaise with the Financial Aid Office to know when the
dates for the interviews.
Disclaimer:
The responsibility of paying school fees lies with the student and his or her guardian(s).
The University would like to make it clear that most of the Financial Aid Programs
32
provide only partial funds. The student should therefore make the necessary
arrangements to meet the rest of the tuition fees and living expenses
Note: Interested applicants should visit the appropriate page on our Web Site:
http://www.usiu.ac.ke for the relevant application forms.
For further information, kindly contact the Financial Aid Office (Tel. 254-20-
3606210); Email: finaid@usiu.ac.ke
3.2 THE DEPARTMENT OF THE REGISTRAR
If you need to update your address, request transcripts, require a letter verifying your
enrolment, take a leave of absence, apply for graduation or obtain clearance for
on Block and can be reached on
Extension 239 or 216.
The office of the Registrar is an academic support department. Its goal is to support the
University by providing information to students, University officials and external
agencies as well as protecting the integrity of student records and University policies.
The University Catalogue offers important information about all degree programs, their
respective course requirements, academic policies and the University Code of Conduct
and Ethics. Please make sure you read the University Catalogue.
Students must become thoroughly familiar with all current regulations of the University.
Students are responsible for complying with all policies and regulations of the university.
They are also responsible for fulfilling all requirements for their respective degree
programs. Requirements are considered complete only when appropriate
documentation is received and recorded in the Registrar's Office.
Student related Services
 Address Updates. All students are advised to update their addresses whenever
they change them
 Processing of Transcripts
 Graduation Application and Clearance
33
 Grade Reporting
 Leave of Absence
 Processing of International Student Resident Permits -
Entry Permits)
 Pre-Registration Coordination
 Academic Calendar
 Enrolment Verification
 Inter-campus Transfer
 USIU ID processing
Verification of enrolment to outside agencies may be obtained from the Registrar's Office
after the close of registration.
The main objective for all Registrars' Office staff is to provide quality services in an
efficient and courteous manner. The Registrar maintains an open door policy for all
students to address any concerns they may have relevant to services provided and/or
clarification of university and/or office policies.
Students must ensure that all the necessary contacts (including mobile numbers and
email addresses) of their next of kin/guardians in and outside Nairobi are filed with the
registrar.
3.2.1 USIU Identification Card
The USIU Identification Card is issued under the following guidelines and policies:
1. Identification: The USIU ID Card is required for identification at the University. It
must be presented upon request to any contractual security personnel or authorized
Universi
(student/staff/faculty/temporary), Authorizing signature, Student / Staff / Faculty ID
number, national ID / Passport number (for staff / faculty), validity period and Library
Barcode number. The card must be properly WORN to ensure proper display at all
times while on campus.
2. Ownership: The ID card is the Property of the United States International University
It must be surrendered upon request of any authorized party. The USIU ID Card office
produces the card and maintains the database of card holders. The card office administers
a set of card policies for the production and use of the card. All cardholders must adhere
to these policies for any use of the card. In the event of graduation, suspension,
34
termination of contract/employment or departure from the University, the cardholder
MUST surrender his/her card to the respective department.
3. Issuance: ID Cards are issued to all new members of the University. This includes New
/ Special Status / Non Degree / Re-admit students, Faculty / Adjunct Faculty, Permanent /
Contractual / Temporary employees, Interns and Consultants.
4. Alterations & Damage: The card may not be altered in any way. No individual or
entity may alter or photocopy the card for any reason. The card may not be re-encoded.
Photocopies of the card will not be accepted. The cardholder will be held responsible for
any damage caused to equipment by an altered card. Replacements for altered cards will
be reiss
card in a manner that will prevent its damage.
5. Replacement: A charge of Kshs.1,500 will be imposed to replace a lost, damaged, or
replacement card for name change. (Name changes must be FIRST updated in the
6. Theft: Incidents of theft or mugging need to be reported to a police station and a
police abstract obtained. This will be required as evidence to present to the security office,
from which, a stolen ID card will be replaced at a cost of KShs.500.
Usage:
 The swipe ID cards can be damaged by nearby magnets or direct sunlight.
 Cell phones, Bank ATM cards, credit cards, speakers and other objects with magnetic
components can demagnetize the magnetic stripe and render it useless as far as
cafeteria, printing, and photocopying services are concerned.
 You are advised to keep the ID card separate from these objects and any others that
may potentially damage your card.
 When placed in direct sunlight, the cards may be damaged.
 Keeping the cards within their plastic holders lengthens their life considerably.
 Usage of the ID is restricted to the owner only. It is not transferable
 USIU will NOT be held liable for any such damage or replacement.
Please Note: All students leaving USIU for whatever reason (e.g. graduation, academic or
disciplinary suspension/dismissal, transfers , leave of Absence etc. must surrender their
IDs to the Registrar upon submission of their clearance forms.
35
3.2.2 Degree Certificate Replacement Policy
If an alumnus loses the degree certificate the following procedure will apply:
They must provide a sworn affidavit from a notary, lawyer or commissioner of
oaths certifying that the original diploma was lost. The affidavit should include
the full name, address and phone number, date of birth, the degree and the year it
was granted.
If the degree certificate is damaged or there is need to change the name on the certificate
the original certificate should be sent to the Registrar.
For name changes, enclose a photocopy of your of birth certificate, change of name
certificate, marriage certificate, proof of divorce or other legal documents that support
your name change, corrections, additions or deletions .
A covering letter must include full name, student number, address and
phone number. It must state the reason for requesting a replacement diploma, and clearly
indicate the changes to be made.
Note: All requests made by a third party on behalf of a graduate must be accompanied by
a signed letter of authorization.
3.3 THE OFFICE OF THE DEAN OF STUDENTS
The office of the Dean of Students is located in the Student Affairs Block. The Dean
oversees student activities, student welfare issues as well as international student services.
Student Affairs staff members are committed to promoting
engagement in activities that will enhance their holistic development. In order to do this,
the Dean of Students office works closely with SAC on student projects and also oversees
other student activities.
Individual students are free to see the Dean whenever there is need. You can reach the
Dean on Ext. 187
3.3.1 The International Students Office
This is the In that handles all international student
related questions. It offers services such as:
 Orientation of international students including organizing the city tour.
36
 Handles specific problems and concerns of individual international students.
 Coordinates student exchange/study abroad programs.
An Orientation for international students is held in the 3rd. week of each semester.
Students interested in exchange programs should attend the awareness program held
every 5th week of the semester. The International Students Officer is responsible for
helping international students benefit from their experiences in USIU. All International
students are advised to visit the University website and access the International Students
Handbook that gives information on:-
a) Immigration documents required by foreign student to study in Kenya
b) Money matters
c) Places to visit in Kenya
d) Safety Abroad (on and off campus)
e) Culture shock, etc.
For more information, please call Extension 212.
3.3.2 The Student Hostels
There are two hostels on campus with a bed capacity of 256. The hostels mainly cater for
international students and those from outside Nairobi. All rooms are for double
occupancy. Common rooms on each floor provide residents with cable television,
recreational areas for games and socialising.
For more information, contact The Head of Housing on Ext. 265.
3.3.3 The Students Activity Office
The Head of Student Activities has an office in the Student Affairs Block and work closely
with SAC, the Sports Committee (SPAC) and the Sports and Clubs Activity Coordinators
to enhance and facilitate the engagement of students in meaningful activities.
1. Sport Activities
At USIU we try to keep students active in different extracurricular activities. The sports
Office co-ordinates sports activities. USIU sport teams represent the university in various
leagues within the country. In order to engage as many students as possible in sports, the
university provides participatory sports programs. Participatory sports teams receive
limited funding to enable them to function. Students are encouraged to participate in
sporting activities for relaxation as well as development of talents.
37
2. The Sports Committee (SPAC)
The Sports Committee is the umbrella organisation of all sport teams on campus. All the
captains of different teams with three other elected players from the Sports Committee
and the three elected members are: - The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and the
secretary/Treasurer. For more details, visit the Sports Office at the Recreation Centre or
the Head of Student Activities on Ext. 281.
3. USIU Sports Teams
 Men's Basketball Team
 Ladies Basketball Team
 Men's Hockey Team
 Rugby Team

4. Campus Participatory Sports
 Swimming
 Tae-Kwon-Do
 Athletics (Track and Field)
 Lawn Tennis
 Badminton
 Squash
 Pool
 Volley ball
 Ladies Hockey Team
 Ladies Soccer Team
 Handball
 Karate
5. Intramurals
The Intramural sports competitions are organised annually during the spring semester to
encourage wide participation in campus sports. Students are divided into teams, which
compete in various disciplines. Trophies are awarded to winners.
6. Clubs
USIU offers students opportunities to pursue other co-curricular activities through
engagement in club events. Students can practice what they learn in class, or engage in
events that build their life skills such as leadership, communication, team work and
project management, by actively participating in club events. All clubs are registered by
38
SAC, which also allocates each club some limited funds to run its events. Students are
encouraged to develop fund raising skills to help cater for club events that may otherwise
not be catered for by the university or SAC. The DVC Student Affairs & Enrolment or
designee acts as an advisor to both SAC and clubs and helps ensure that all activities are
conducted within the regulations stated in the clubs Handbook or the various
constitutions. Individual club patrons, who are either USIU members of faculty or staff,
play an advisory role to the clubs and assist them in running their activities.
There are over twenty five register clubs in the university and students are encouraged to
register more as per the procedures in the Club Handbook.
For a complete list of registered clubs, please contact the following:
 SAC Assistant Secretary On Ext 243
 The Head of Student Activities Ext: 144
 The Cubs Coordinator Ext. 173
 Dean of Students Ext 281
3.3.4 The Students Center
The Student Center which is located between the student hostels and auditorium is a
complex that houses the offices of the Sports Activities Coordinator, the gym, aerobics
room, TV room, pool tables and changing rooms. Trained Gym instructors help students
go through various fitness programs suitable for their needs and abilities. There are three
aerobics sessions daily for students. Students have to pay a small fee to use the contracted
Pool tables services.
3.3.5 The Year Book
The yearbook, which is published once a year, is a memorabilia for graduates. The book is
compiled and edited by a committee, under the supervision of faculty from the
journalism program. The Dean of Students oversees the work of this committee.
Students wishing to join this committee should watch out for the relevant advertisement
in the fall semester or contact the Head of the Journalism Program on Ext.310.
3.4 THE COUNSELING CENTER
The office of the Head of Counselling Services is located in the Counselling Block
opposite Classrooms I and J as well as the Student Affairs Block and the SAC office. The
Head of Counselling oversees all services and programs in the center. The Staff in the
39
Counselling Center are committed to helping students develop life skills and healthy
lifestyles.
Services provided in the center include:-
 Personal Counselling Services
 Career Counselling
 Group Counselling
 Awareness programs through workshops, seminars, and notice board campaigns.
 Life skills development
 Voluntary Counselling and Testing ( VCT)
The office works closely with special needs students and students with academic
problems. University Counsellors are the patrons of the Peer Counselling Club and Peer
Educators.
Counselling services are confidential and matters discussed on a personal level are treated
with confidentiality. This is the place for you to talk with a view to working on your
personal growth. There is always a counsellor available during working hours. However,
to ensure timeliness and orderliness, it is advisable to book an appointment with the
Counselling Assistant at the centre. We hope that you will make use of this facility in
order to help resolve problems or conflicts you may be facing. The counselling office can
be reached on Ext. 311 and 297
3.4.1 The AIDS Control Unit (ACU)
In order to manage the response to HIV and AIDS, the University has established
an Aids Control Unit that is strong, sustainable, well equipped and with
adequate and qualified staff.
The ACU is mandated to:
 Provide a framework for guiding the implementation, monitoring and evaluation
of HIV and AIDS activities at all levels.
 Coordinate, plan, manage and implement programs and activities in line with the
HIV and AIDS policy
 Spearhead the fight against HIV and AIDS at all levels.
 Actively and effectively involve managers, heads of departments, and all other
leaders in the response to HIV and AIDS.
40
 Coordinate resource mobilization, planning and budgeting in liaison with other
partners.
 Advise the university on HIV and AIDs related issues including the
implementation of the HIV policy.
 Develop a shared strategy aimed at preventing the spread of the HIV and AIDS
pandemic and mitigating its impact.
 Ensure that HIV and AIDS are mainstreamed into the core functions of the
University.
 Ensure adequate structures, staffing, and continuity of staffing for HIV and AIDS
related functions.
 Organize and execute outreach programs for the local community.
 Design an HIV and AIDS curriculum and facilitate the training of peer educators
and others.
 Spearhead the monitoring and evaluation of the HIV and AIDS response
programs and utilize the information for planning and management.
 Gather, analyze, disseminate and store research data pertaining to HIV and
AIDS.
 Undertake the review of this policy from time to time to ensure relevancy.
3.5.5 Career Counselling and the Placement Office
The Career Counselling mission is to assist in establishing links between prospective
employers and USIU students. The Career counsellor will help you achieve this mission
through:
 Career guidance and training on CV / Resume writing and interview skills.
 Career fair programs held every summer semester to introduce students to
prospective employers.
 Equipping students with job search skills.
 Organizing events for students to meet employers and learn about different
professional fields.
 Developing a database for graduating students.
 Organizing recruitment drives within the USIU campus.
 Providing students with resources for career assessments.
The Career Counsellor can be reached on Ext. 162.
41
4.0 POLICIES AND REGULATIONS
4.1 Guidelines on Posters and Use of Official Electronic Media on Campus
a) All posters and SAC related activity posters, flyers, advertisements, notices related to
student activities and by students, MUST be approved and stamped by the Student
Affairs Council (SAC). The Sports Committee approves adverts for sports.
b) Before you bring these items to the Student Affairs Office, ensure that:
75% of all writing is in English or translated.
 The items do not advertise cigarettes or alcohol.
 The literature is dated and signed.
 The event has been approved by the respective Head of Department or Patron.
c) The Housing Officer or a designated Resident Assistant must authorise any literature
which is posted on the Hostel notice boards.
d) Material for websites MUST comply with university regulations (including copyright
laws) and must also first be approved by club patrons or the Head of Student
Activities.
4.1.1 Use of Surfaces, Bulletin Boards & Spaces
1. The Dean of Students Office in conjunction with other relevant University
Officers and SAC may determine how bulletin boards may be used from time to
time. For example, bulletin boards may be limited to official University or student
related information or may be designated as general purpose bulletin boards.
2. No bulletin boards on campus may be used for informational and commercial
purposes unless with prior approval. All notices are subject to removal two-weeks
after they are posted, except student election campaign materials, which must be
removed within 48 hours after the day of the election.
3. The use of exterior and interior surfaces in residence halls is subject to regulation
by the University Student Affairs.
4. To avoid littering the campus, material may not be placed on vehicles.
42
5. Except for student election materials, no signs, exhibits, works of art, displays,
temporary structures or other materials may be posted or displayed on University
grounds or adjacent to University facilities without prior written approval.
6. No materials may be fastened to any part of a facility except on spaces provided
for this purpose. Materials may not interfere with ingress, egress or safety of any
individual using a facility. If posting or display of any material could result in
damage to a facility, prior written approval must be obtained from the Operations
Manager.
7. In addition to being subject to those consequences associated with violations of
this policy, persons responsible for damage to walls or other surfaces resulting
from violation of this paragraph shall pay the cost of repair, and may be subjected
to applicable criminal laws.
4.1.2 Policy on Use of University Facilities
Academic classes in all buildings are scheduled by the University Academic Program
Administrators. Class scheduling takes first priority in the use of facilities.
For use of other University facilities, members of University community shall have to
reserve such facilities by contacting the persons listed in the table below, who are
responsible for approving use of specific facilities and programs as indicated below.
Responsible Person Department Areas of Concern
Head of Student Activities Student Activities Student related
Academic Program Admin Academic Affairs Academic related
Head of Admissions Enrolment Admissions
Public Relations Manager University wide events
Registrar Enrolment Student registry
Head of Human Resources Finance & Administration Employee events
Operations Director Operations Facilities
Hospitality Manager/Chef Operations Cafeteria
University Librarian Academic Affairs Library Facilities
Head of Security All areas All areas
Academic Affairs Academic Affairs Boardrooms and conference
Administrative Assistants- rooms
DCV AA and Academic
Deans
43
ICT Director ICT ICT facilities
University Legal Counsel Legal Matters and contracts
The following guidelines apply when reserving a facility for use.
 Requests to the relevant offices must be in writing and copied to relevant Deputy
Vice Chancellor and/or Dean
 Requests must be made at least a week before the anticipated event
 Any use of University facilities must not violate the University policy of non-
discrimination, littering , substance abuse among others
 Activities in or on University facilities must not violate the policies, regulations, or
laws of the republic of Kenya
 Use of any facility shall not be authorised where such use may disturb the conduct
of University activities.
 Use of any facility must be appropriate for the size, design and purpose of the
facility and must not pose an undue burden on University resources.
 Events or activities that may require use of fire/fireworks must get prior approval
from both the Director of Operations and Head of Security.
 The University reserves the right to cancel or modify reservations of any external
organisations seeking use of the University facility should the reservation conflict
with functions central to the educational mission of the University.
 Guidelines to help students plan and manage their events are available on the web
44
5.0 THE STUDENT CODE OF CONDUCT: NON-ACADEMIC
5.1 Conduct Jurisdiction
The university reserves the right to take necessary actions to protect the safety, image and
well being of the campus community and to protect its facilities and programs. All
students regardless of where they live are members of the academic community with the
same basic rights and responsibilities. All students are subject to the code of conduct. The
university may deal with violations whether they occur on or off campus.
Students are expected to abide by the laws of Kenya and the policies of USIU. Students
who violate the law may incur penalties prescribed by civil authorities. In such cases when
the university's interests are involved, the authority of the university may be asserted. The
vice Chancellor or designee will determine if the interests of the University are involved
and if legal and/or disciplinary actions are necessary. The University will however not be
responsible for any student who finds himself or herself in the
Criminal/Civil justice system for prosecution.
Violation of a university regulation, which is a violation of Kenyan or civil law, and
affects the university, shall be procedurally handled as a university disciplinary situation
regardless of whether there is a prosecution under law.
Disciplinary action at the university will not be subject to challenge on the grounds that
criminal charges involving the same incident have been dismissed or reduced. Finally,
the implementation of university disciplinary authority does not protect the student
from; nor does the university necessarily consider it to be a substitution for civil process
or criminal prosecution.
Student organizations and groups formally approved by the university are subject to the
same regulations as individual students. Cases will be considered if a significant number
of students involved in the alleged offences belong to an organization or group, or if the
planning and leadership for an alleged offence came from student member of an
organization or group.
In general, the university, by its disciplinary authority, attempts to promote:
1. Concern with matters, which impinge upon academic achievement and standards,
and the personal integrity of students.
2. Protection of property
45
3. Interest in the mental and physical health and safety of members of its community.
4. Concern for preserving the peace for ensuring orderly procedures, and for
maintaining student morale.
5. Responsibility for character development, for maintaining standards of decency and
good taste, and for providing an appropriate moral climate on the campus.
6. Protection of its good relations with the community.
5.1.1 Conduct Regulations
A student who is found in violation of any of the following regulations is subject to the
sanctions provided in this policy. The implications of some violations are so serious that a
single incident would require a sanction at or near the maximum. Other violations
become significant through repetition or if they are committed intentionally or recklessly.
A violation will be regarded as more serious if it is criminal or committed because of race,
gender, religion, national origin, disability or sexual orientation of another individual or
group of individuals. Below are examples of acts and / or behaviours that would mostly
constitute serious violations and the consequent disciplinary sanctions. The sanctions
indicated are the bare minimum for the offences cited. Higher level disciplinary
sanctions may therefore be imposed depending on the seriousness of the offence. The list
below is not exhaustive.
1. Actual or threatened physical assault or intentional or reckless injury to self, persons
or property. - Probation Level II
2. Offensive or disorderly conduct, which causes interference, annoyance or alarm, or
recklessly creates a risk of harm. -Probation level I
3. Interfering with the freedom of any person to express his/her views, including invited
speakers Probation Level I
4. Interference with entry into or exit from buildings or areas or free movement of any
person-Probation level I
5. Behavior or activities which endanger the safety of oneself and /or others, and /or
property- Probation Level II
6. Disruption or obstructions of teaching, research administration, disciplinary
proceedings or other university activities.-Probation Level II
7. Violation of any of the restrictions, conditions, or terms of a sanctions resulting from
prior disciplinary action.- Probation Level II
8. Refusal to display or provide identification upon demand by or to comply with other
directions of university staff members or the staff of contractual affiliates of the
university or other public officials acting in the performance of their duties, while on
46
university property or at official university functions; or resisting or obstructing such
officials in the performance of their duties. Probation Level II
9. Misuse of university documents including, but not limited to forging, transferring,
altering or otherwise misusing a student ID card, PIN number, official letterhead or
other university identifications, or committing any other acts of forgery; conniving to
violate policy, or peddling false hoods. Probation Level II
10. Possession, sale, use, transfer, purchase, or delivery of drugs except as expressly
permitted by law.-Dismissal
11. Making false statements in any application for admission, petition, request or other
Official University document or record.-Probation Level II
12. Forcible entry into a building or other premises. Probation Level II
13. Trespass or Unauthorized presence in a building or other premises.-Probation level I
14. Unauthorized Possession or use of firearms, fireworks, dangerous weapons, or
possession of restricted chemicals when not authorized or possession or use of
realistic looking toy weapons that can be used to threaten people. Dismissal
15. Starting fires, or igniting fireworks, or any form of explosives, false reporting of a
bomb, incendiary device, or other explosive, or any false reporting of an emergency
Probation Level II
16. Tampering with fire or safety equipment. Probation Level II
17. Refusal to evacuate during fire, bomb, and earthquake preparedness drills. Probation
level II
18. Damage, destruction, tampering or defacement of personal, public, university or
university affiliates' property.-Probation Level II
19. Obscenity or lewd or indecent conduct. -Probation Level II
20. Illegal gambling.-Probation Level I
21. Unauthorized use of university letterheads, logo, intellectual or physical property,
facilities, e.g. transports, computers, notice boards etc. or facilities of members of the
university community or university affiliates' or contracted services.- Probation Level
II
22. Violation of residence hall rules and regulations. - Sanctions as per residence
handbook.
23. Violation of published university policies, rules and regulations, including but not
limited to alcohol use, smoking, and verbal and/or written harassment.-Probation
Level 1I
24. The misuse of telephone or communication equipment including electronic and non
electronic mail, and facilities such as notice boards and fliers. -Probation Level I
25. Any violation of National or local laws/bylaws. -Probation Level I
26. Unauthorized use of the university logo, facilities, premises or any other property for
commercial purposes Probation Level 11.
47
27. Receiving or offering items, funds or services that can under surrounding
circumstance be reasonably construed as a bribe, payoff or kickback.-Probation Level
II
28. Forms of protest and/or political agitation that disrupt the normal activities of the
university and interferes with the rights of other students. Suspension
29. Theft and/ or handling of stolen property- Dismissal
30. Any acts that violate the essence of the University Code of Conduct. Probation Level
II
31. Speeding on Campus, Causing injury to self or others through driving- Banned
from driving to the University.
5.1.2 Disciplinary Procedures
Disciplinary action is intended to identify and correct problems. Distinct disciplinary
procedures have been designated to ensure the rights of due process and a fair hearing.
 The Dean of Students will be the university Hearing Officer and he/she or his/her
designee will process minor incidents involving letters of warning.
 The Housing Officer in consultation with the Hearing Officer will process such
incidents occurring in the residence halls.
Complaints involving discrimination will follow the procedures outlined in this
Handbook in the section titled "Discrimination: Students Initiated Grievance
Procedures".
Other incidents will be processed according to the following disciplinary procedures.
5.1.3 Disciplinary Charges
 Any member of the university community or university department may bring up
charges against any student. Such charges must be written and filed in the office of
the Dean of Students or designee.
 Students with non-academic charges against members of staff or Faculty must file
them in writing with the Dean of Students who will carry out the initial
investigations and refer them to appropriate university authorities for the
processing of the disciplinary charges as may be necessary.
 A complaint filed against a student in writing must be received within 14 calendar
days of the infraction. This time for filing can be extended up to one calendar year
by the DVC Student Affairs or designee based upon unforeseen information or
circumstances.
 The Hearing Officer or designee will acknowledge the complaint within five (5)
working days, initiate the hearing process within ten (10) working days of receipt
48
of a complaint and give notification for the hearing within the next five (5)
working days
 The Hearing Officer will chair the proceedings in a 5-member panel comprising
two students, a faculty member, a staff member and the Hearing Officer or
designee. All the five (5) members will have to be present at a hearing. The
Hearing Officer or designee will have a casting vote in case of a tie.
 The Hearing Officer or Designee will convene all disciplinary meetings.
 The Management Council on the recommendation of the DVC Student Affairs
will appoint members of the panel who will serve for a period of one year. This
period is subject to renewal
5.2 Hearing Procedures
1. The accused student(s) or organization official(s) will be provided written
notification of time, place and date of the hearing. Sufficient notice is defined as at
least five working days. The notice will include the charges that will be reviewed
and other pertinent information about the hearing. An extension may be
requested within two days of the receipt of the notice.
2. The student(s) or organization representative has/have the right to have a friendly
advisor present at the hearing who should be a USIU faculty member, student or
member of staff.
3. The hearing will be closed to the public, except for an immediate member of the
students' family and his/her advisor or witness. Since the university judicial
system is quasi legal, people acting in the capacity of lawyers will not be allowed to
participate or represent students in the hearing. The university reserves the right
to review individuals participating in the hearing procedures based upon their
involvement with the incident.
4. Oral or written testimony by the accused student (s) or witness may be presented.
5. Student witnesses may be subject to charges of dishonesty within the university
disciplinary system if their testimony is deemed to be intentionally inaccurate.
6. Prospective witnesses, other than the accuser(s) and accused may, at the
discretion of the university hearing officer, be excluded from the hearing during
the testimony of other witnesses.
7. Any person, including the accused student(s), who disrupt(s) a hearing, may be
excluded from the proceedings.
8. The Hearing will be conducted in a fair and impartial manner, although strict
rules of evidence do not apply.
9. The University judicial system is quasi-legal no lawyers sit on its panel
49
5.2.1 A suggested order for hearing is as follows:
A. Introduction.
B. Disciplinary philosophy of the university.
C. Charges (in the presence of the accused).
D. Evidence in support of the charges.
E. Witnesses in support of the charges.
F. Evidence in support of the accused.
G. Witness in support of the accused.
H. Review of the evidence and testimony.
 If an accused student fails to appear at a scheduled hearing without a valid excuse,
the university hearing officer will proceed to a decision based upon the evidence
presented.
 Hearing proceedings must be recorded on audiotape or other reliable means of
making a record as determined by the university Hearing Officer. The record
must be maintained in the Student Affairs office for two years or until such a time
as all appeal procedures are exhausted.
 Pending action on any charges, the status of the student will not be altered, except
in cases involving interim suspensions and only in accordance with the
procedures for such suspensions.
 The accused has the right to receive in writing the decision of the Hearing Officer
that must contain reasons for the action, findings of facts and an explanation of
the sanctions.
 The university Hearing Officer shall prepare this notification in a timely manner,
but no longer than 30 calendar days after the hearing.
5.2.2 Disciplinary Sanctions
The following disciplinary sanctions comprise a range of official action that may be
imposed for violation of regulations. One or more sanctions may be imposed.
No refunds will be made to students who are suspended or dismissed from the University
for Disciplinary Reasons. Further, if the disciplinary action results in the loss of any
University contracted service for the student, no refund is available.
Additionally students who violate the laws of Kenya may also be referred to the criminal
system for prosecution.
50
For students found to be using illegal substances or to be in violation of the alcohol use
policy, a condition of continuance at the university may include the completion of an
appropriate education or rehabilitation program.
1. Disciplinary Warning
In cases of minor student misconduct, this written action is taken when the individual's
conduct or involvement merits an official admonition. The student is warned that further
misconduct may result in more severe disciplinary action.
2. Disciplinary Probations
 Probation-Level I A serious form of reprimanding that is fitting for the type of
violation or repeated violations as designated for a certain period of time by the
University hearing Officer. The student may, if deemed appropriate, represent the
University in activities and hold office in student organizations during the time
stipulated as probationary. The student is notified that further infraction of any
University regulation may result in more stringent restriction being placed on his/her
actions.
 Probation-Level II The most serious level of disciplinary sanction short of
suspension from the university. The student remains enrolled at the University under
circumstances defined by the University hearing officer. The student will not
represent the University in an official capacity or hold office in any student
organization. The student is however, still considered to be in "good standing".
Examples of representing the University in an official capacity include: participation
in club, athletics events or teams, recognized student organizations, or any officially
recognized responsibility as related to campus employment. This probation level
indicates to the student that further violation of any university regulations will result
in more stringent disciplinary action, including but not limited to suspension or
dismissal from the University. Additional restrictions may be placed on the student
while on Level II probation, such as loss of on-campus housing privileges or
restrictions from campus events and activities.
On completion of the disciplinary sanctions, the student must apply to the Hearing
Officer for reinstatement. An extension of the sanctions may be affected if the student
did not abide by the terms of the suspension.
51
3. Interim Suspension
 The DVC, SA or his / her designee may suspend a student and / or remove the
student from on-campus housing for an interim period pending full disciplinary
proceedings whenever there is evidence that the continued presence of the student
on the university campus posses a substantial threat to the safety or well-being of
any person or persons, university property or the property of others.
 An interim suspension may become effective immediately without prior notice.
A student suspended on an interim basis will be given an opportunity to appear
personally before a hearing officer within 14 working days from the effective date
of the interim suspension.
 During an interim suspension, the student will be barred from all or part of the
university premises. Any student under interim suspension who returns to the
portion of campus to which he / she is barred without permission from the DVC,
SA will be subject to further disciplinary action.
4. Suspension
This sanction is one of involuntary separation of the student from the University for a
designated period of time. The University hearing officer may establish additional
requirements, which must be fulfilled to his/her satisfaction, prior to reinstatement. The
student will also be barred from university premises and participating in any University
activities.
On completion of the suspension period, the group must apply for reinstatement. An
extension of the suspension may be effected if the group did not abide by the terms of the
suspension.
5. Suspension of Group Recognition
This sanction consists of the withdrawal for stated periods of time of all or part of the
official recognition of an organization or group. Such action may include conditions for
reinstatement or recognition. Total removal or recognition results in complete
suspension of the activity of the group.
On completion of disciplinary sanctions, the student must apply for their official lifting.
An extension of the sanctions may be affected if the student did not abide by their terms
of the sanction.
52
53
6. Dismissal
This sanction is one of involuntary and permanent separation from the University.
Notice of permanent dismissal will appear on the students' academic history and
transcript. The student will also be barred from University activities and premises.
7. Revocation of Group Recognition
This sanction is permanent cancellation of the official University recognition and
privileges of a group and results in complete suspension of the group.
8. Restitution Fines
The student or the organization may be required to make payment to the University or to
another specified person(s) or group(s) for damages incurred as a result of a violation of
any provision of the student code of conduct. The University in addition to any other
sanction applied may demand restitution fines. Restitution fines may include an
administrative fee for processing.
5.2.3 Appeal Procedure
Formal appeal of a decision reached by the University Hearing Officer must be made to
the DVC Student Affairs or designee in writing within five (5) working days of receipt of
the outcome of the hearing. Failure to submit the appeal in writing within the allotted
time will render the original decision final and conclusive. This procedure, like the
university hearing procedures provides for the internal resolutions of disciplinary related
incidents and is not a legal forum. Consequently, representation of parties by legal
counsel will not permitted
An appeal must be based upon one or more of the following conditions:
1. Errors in interpretation or implementation of procedures for conduct violations
were so significant as to effectively deny the student a fair hearing.
2. New and significant evidence, which could not have been discovered by diligent
preparation for presentation at the initial hearing, is now available.
3. Lack of substantial evidence in the record to support the outcome. The DVC
Student Affairs will limit his/her inquiry to the record of fact from the hearing
below.
 The DVC Student Affairs must respond in writing within 10 calendar days to an
appeal.
54
 The DVC Student Affairs may reject, amend or modify the action taken by the
hearing officer, or grant a hearing. Should a hearing be granted, the student will
receive notification of the time, place and date. The hearing may be informal but a
record of the proceedings will be taken.
 The decision of the DVC Student Affairs shall be final.
5.3 ALCOHOL AND DRUG POLICY
 USIU is an alcohol and drug free environment. This includes the whole campus
environment, facilities, buildings and properties, and at no time or event can
alcohol or other intoxicating substances be served.
 All members of the USIU community and their guests are expected to observe
national law, to take personal responsibility for their conduct, and to comply with
this alcohol policy. Failure to comply will result in disciplinary actions that may
include probation, suspension, or dismissal from the university. Violators may be
required to undertake counselling with any recognized professional Counsellor
within or outside the university. Mandatory attendance of a legally recognized
alcohol education program may be required.
 Alcohol-related misconduct will not be tolerated. Individuals will be disciplined if
their use of alcohol causes disorder, public disturbance, property damage and/or
danger to themselves or others. USIU will impose sanctions when the illegal use of
alcohol is reported.
 Alcohol consumption is NOT allowed during any University related travel or
function.
Sanctions for alcohol related incidents will be dealt with as indicated below:
1. Disorderly conduct as per regulation 6.1.1 Articles; 2, 5, 6 in the Student
Handbook will attract-Probation Level II
A repeat of the misbehaviour above will result in Suspension from the
university
2. An alcohol related violation of conduct regulation No. 1 in section 6.1.1
Of the Handbook (Actual or threatened physical assault or intentional or
reckless injury to self, person or property) will lead to Suspension.
55
Repeated violations of No. 1 or No. 2 above (after serving a suspension), will result
in Dismissal from the university
If you have friends or there are students in your classes that are experiencing problems
with alcohol, please encourage them to seek counselling. Remember this is an illness. If
they were diabetic or hypertensive you would encourage them to receive medical
attention. Alcohol abuse warrants the same consideration.
5.3.1. Drugs
 Possession or consumption of illegal drugs is prohibited in USIU and in all official
functions of the university. Anyone found in possession of such drugs (including
miraa or kuber), other than those prescribed by a physician will be in violation of
this regulations and therefore liable to disciplinary action.
 It is a criminal offence in Kenya to take and/or be found in possession of illegal
drugs including but not limited to cannabis (bhang), heroin, morphine, cocaine,
opium etc.
 It is unlawful to be in any room or place where any controlled substances (such as
marijuana) or narcotics are being unlawfully smoked or used.
 The university authorities reserve the right to carry out inspections and / or order
drug/alcohol tests whenever necessary.
Note: USIU has a zero tolerance policy on drug related offences and any violations will
result in dismissal from the university.
5.3.2 Smoking
Smoking or any form of tobacco use in university buses, buildings and compound is
strictly prohibited. Security officers will be on the lookout and will file charges against any
violators. Violations of this policy will automatically attract Probation Level 11
disciplinary sanction.
A repeat of the offence may attract Suspension. Repeated violations after serving
Probation Level II may result in Dismissal
5.3.3 Drug and Alcohol Abuse Prevention Information
56
 As an educational institution, the University is primarily concerned with helping
individual students achieve academic goals. When health problems arise, the
University may assist and guide a student whose mental or physical health is
threatened. Because of health hazards, students who choose to use alcohol outside
the university should do so responsibly. Should students or their friends have a
problem with alcohol or other drugs, there are several resources on campus where
one can receive assistance, these include:
1. The Counselling services
2. The Health Center
3. Peer Counsellors
 About alcohol: Alcohol is the most widely used drug in the world. Each year,
there are serious injuries and deaths resulting from misuse. Alcohol abuse can
lead to injuries, automobile accidents, fights, sexual assaults, marital problems
vandalism, academic failure, an increased risk of HIV and AIDS and other
sexually transmitted infections and even death by suicide, drowning, falls and
other causes.
 Although many people do not think of it as a drug, alcohol is a powerful mood
altering substance. Technically, it falls into a class of drugs known as sedative
hypnotic. Alcohol depresses the brain centers for self control and inhibition,
which often leads to loud or aggressive behavior and makes alcohol appear to act
like a stimulant. Like all drugs, its effects depend on the dosage. The University
authorities may order professional medical assessment as may be necessary when
dealing with cases of violation of the alcohol policy.
 Consumption of alcoholic beverage impairs the ability to drive a car, operate
machinery or think clearly and may cause serious health problems. People
who are drunk should not drive. Women should not drink alcoholic beverages
during pregnancy because of the health risks to their unborn babies.
5.4 LITTERING AND GRAFFITI POLICY
5.4.1 Policy Statement
The purpose of this policy is to regulate and ensure a clean and safe environment by
proposing appropriate practices that will ensure all spaces, surfaces, roads, and immediate
surrounding areas are clean and in a state acceptable to our standards as a leading
57
institution. It is the responsibility of every student to keep the campus and its environs
clean. This includes the walk way from Safari Park Hotel to the university. Students are
responsible for the proper disposal of fliers (e.g. elections) that they originate. University
security will file charges against offenders. A fine of Ksh 2000 will be imposed on
offenders.
This policy complements other guidelines included in other USIU handbooks and does
not contradict any other regulations in existence
5.4.2 Policy Regulations
 Littering: It is against this policy for members of the University community to
litter the compound, facilities and buses with food and drinking containers,
chewing gum/chocolate wrappers, straws & straw wrappers, serviettes, waste
papers and careless disposal of unwanted material. Such items must be properly
disposed of in dustbins or disposal containers as provided for.
 Graffiti: The writing of graffiti in any university building or property is
prohibited and will attract Probation Level 11 or Suspension if repeated.
5.4.3 Implementation and Compliance:
If a member of the University community suspects or witnesses anyone in violation of
this policy as stated in 6.5.2 above, they should immediately contact the Security Officer,
the Dean of Students , the Human Resources Office (if staff or faculty are involved), SAC
or any other department manager. In particular Security Guards and Cafeteria Staff will
be on the lookout for offenders.
Sanctions
Violators of this policy will automatically attract Probation Level 1 disciplinary sanction
and a fine of Kshs.2, 000/-. If the violator is unable to pay the fine, they will clean litter
for a week (5 working days) under the supervision of the Maintenance Supervisor. A
repeat violation will attract a minimum of Probation Level II and a fine of KShs. 4000.
Based on the degree of violation of this policy and putting into consideration the above
mentioned disciplinary action, nothing in this policy shall hinder the University from
taking appropriate action to rectify the situation. Repeated violations will attract higher-
level sanctions.
58
5.5 POLICY OF NON-DISCRIMINATION
5.5.1 Preamble
It is the policy of USIU to provide equal education and employment opportunities
without unlawful discrimination of any kind, including harassment or retaliation for
reporting a complaint. This policy applies to prohibit discrimination between members of
the University community including between students and between employees and
students.
USIU encourages prompt reporting of complaints so that a rapid response can be made
and appropriate action taken. Note that reporting a complaint need not be limited to
someone who was the target of the discrimination.
The University encourages discussion between the two parties involved in the grievances,
especially in the early stages of the dispute before the respective parties have assumed
official or public positions. In any event, all or any discrimination complaints that
become official or public must be formalized.
5.5.2 Student Initiated Grievances Procedure: Filing a Formal Grievance
 Any student who feels that he/she has been subjected to discrimination by a
student or by the University through any of its staff, faculty, entities, policies,
procedures, or programs may report the matter in writing to the DVC for Student
Affairs or designee, who will investigate the matter and if necessary, refer it to the
DVC, Academic Affairs or the Human Resources Manager (HRM) as the case may
be.
 It is important that the student reports the incident completely so that a thorough
and unbiased investigation can be made.
 The DVC SA or designee will acknowledge receipt of the complaint within five (5)
working days from the date of filing.
 The Human Resource Manager, DVC Academic Affairs or the DVC, Student
Affairs will take the appropriate action in response to the complaint, and may
impose appropriate measures on an interim basis when there is reasonable cause
to believe that such an action is needed for health, safety, or welfare of the student
or other members of the University community or to avoid disruption of the
academic process.
 All parties will be informed in writing on a timely basis of any such interim action.
Otherwise, the parties to the grievance should maintain the status quo and no
services should be removed or additional obligations imposed.
59
5.5.3 Complaints against the University or an Employee
 When the complaint is against the University or an employee, the Human
Resource Manager investigates the complaints thoroughly, and will keep the
complainant and the DVC, Student Affairs informed about the status of the
investigation.
 Based on the investigation the Human Resource Manager will determine whether
it is probable that the conduct complained of occurred and whether it violates the
policy of non-discrimination.
 After due investigation, the Human Resource Manager may attempt to resolve the
matter by mutual consent of the accused and the accuser.
 The Human Resource Manager will notify the employee's supervisor, for
appropriate disciplinary or remedial action.
 The DVC Student Affairs will handle non academic grievances related to
university policies, procedures, entities or programs and where necessary, notify
the Vice Chancellor, and/or DVC Academic Affairs or Management Council as
the case may be.
 Where a complaint is against a faculty member, the DVC Academic Affairs
will handle the matter in accordance to academic rules, conduct regulations,
policies and procedures.
 Within 30 calendar days of the filing of the grievance, the Human Resource
Manager will notify the complainant, the victim (if the complaint is not the
victim), and the accused in writing of the findings, the remedy (subject to legal
restrictions on the disclosure of disciplinary action), and appeal right.
 Any employee found to be responsible for discrimination in violation of this
policy will be subjected to appropriate disciplinary action up to and including
termination. The severity of the disciplinary action will depend on the
circumstance of the infraction.
5.5.4 Complaints against Students
 When a complaint is against a student, the DVC Student Affairs (DVCSA) or
designee will conduct a thorough investigation, and will keep the complainant
informed about the status of the investigation.
 Any student found to be responsible for discrimination in violation of this policy
is subject to disciplinary action of up to and including suspension or dismissal by
60
the DVCSA or designee. The severity of the disciplinary action will depend on the
circumstances of the infraction.
 Within 30 calendar days of filing the grievance, the DVCSA will notify the
complainant, the victim (if the complainant is not the victim), and the accused in
writing of the findings, including whether or not discrimination occurred, the
remedy (subject to legal restrictions on the disclosure of disciplinary action), and
appeal rights.
5.5.6 Investigating a Complaint
 Confidentiality: Only those who have an immediate need to know, including the
individual to whom the report is made, the alleged target or victim of the
discrimination, the accused and any witness, will or may find out the identity of
the complainant. Persons contacted in the course of the investigation will be
advised that all parties involved in a charge are entitled to respect and that any
retaliation against an individual who is an alleged target of discrimination, who
has made a complaint, or who has provided evidence in connection with a
complaint is a separate actionable offence as provided. Confidentiality will be
maintained throughout the investigation to the extent practical and appropriate
under the circumstances.
 Co-operation: If a party fails to co-operate with a University sponsored
investigation, he or she will be subject to appropriate discipline.
 Aspects of Investigation: The parties will have the opportunity to present
evidence. Giving any false evidence will be considered a serious infraction and will
attract severe disciplinary sanctions which for students, may include suspension
from the university
 False Accusation: If the investigation results in a finding that the complaint
falsely accused another of discrimination knowingly or in a malicious manner, the
complaint will be subjected to appropriate sanctions including the possibility of
dismissal.
5.5.7 Appeals
If either party is dissatisfied with the outcome or resolution, that party has the right to
appeal the decision. However, this procedure provides for the internal resolution of
61
complaints and is not a legal forum. Consequently, representation of parties by legal
counsel in not permitted.
The dissatisfied party should submit written comments and request for appeal to the
DVCSA no later than 10 working days after receipt of the decision.
The DVCSA will refer the matter for hearing if necessary. Where a hearing is required, it
will be held within 10 working days before a three-person panel comprising of a student,
a faculty and a staff member appointed by the Deputy Vice Chancellor. The panel will
conduct a thorough review of the investigation report.
The parties will be given written notice, within a reasonable time to appear before the
hearing. This notice will include a brief statement of the factual basis of the complaint, the
time and place of the hearing, and the names of the panel members. Before the hearing,
the parties may reject any panel member on ground of conflict of interest.
The parties will have the opportunity to present documents and witnesses. The panel will
make an adequate record of the hearing by written memorandum, tape recording or
otherwise.
The panel will have the discretion to establish procedures for matters not set forth here.
For example:
 Relevant evidence be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which reasonable
persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the
existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the
admission of the evidence over objection in civil action;
 Witness be excluded from the hearing room except while testifying; or
 Independent testimony is sought from experts whether or not the parties
presented testimony from experts at the hearing.
All proceedings of the panel will be closed to public, except by written consent of each
party and the Deputy Vice Chancellor.
The Deputy Vice Chancellor will issue a decision within 10 working days after receipt of
the panel's recommendation. The Vice Chancellors decision is final.
62
5.5.8 Maintaining a Written Record of the Grievance
The University will maintain a written record of the grievance and how it was
investigated and resolved. Written records pertaining to staff will be maintained in the
Human Resource Office whereas the DVC Student Affairs office will maintain student
records for five years from the date of resolution unless new circumstances dictated that
the file should be kept for a longer period.
5.6 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
It is the policy of the United States International University that all persons should enjoy
freedom from unlawful discrimination of any kind. The purpose of this policy is to
provide notification against sexual harassment as a form of sexual discrimination and to
provide notification of available remedies.
This policy applies to prohibit misconduct between members of the University
community, including between students, or between students and University employees.
Law forbids sexual harassment. "Sexual Harassment" means unwelcome sexual advances,
request for sexual favour, and other verbal, visual or physical conduct of a sexual nature.
This behavior is unacceptable in the academic environment and in other university-
related settings such as university-sponsored activities or university related social events.
Sexual harassment is sexually related behavior the victim perceives as offensive or
threatening or which makes the victim uncomfortable. It is usually repeated behavior, but
it can be an action that occurs only once. Sexual harassment exists when:
Submission to the conduct is explicitly or implicitly made a term or a condition of an
individual's academic status or progress.
Submission to or rejection of the conduct by the individual is used as the basis of
academic decisions affecting the individual.
The conduct has the purpose or effect of having a negative impact upon the individual's
academic performance, or of creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive educational
environment; or submission to, or rejection of, the conduct by the individual is used as
the basis for and decision affecting the individual regarding benefits and services, honors,
programs, or activities available at or through the University.
Examples that may constitute sexual harassment include:
63
 Offering grades or academic benefits in exchange for sexual favors
 Making or threatening reprisals after a negative response to sexual advances. Subtle
pressure for sexual activity
 Unnecessary brushes or touches
 Disparaging remarks about one's gender or physical appearance
 Assault
 Physical aggression such as pinching and patting.
 Verbal sexual abuse directly expressed or disguised as humour
 Whistling in a suggestive manner.
 Obscene gestures.
 Favoritism of any kind toward one gender or another.
Any student who feels that he or she has been subjected to sexual harassment by any
University employee or other University student should let the offender know
immediately and firmly that the student is rejecting the advance or invitation and that the
employee's/other student's behavior is unwelcome.
No individual will suffer any reprisals for reporting any incidents of sexual harassment or
making any such complaints, or participating as a witness in the investigation. Any
incidents or further harassment or retaliation should be reported immediately.
Procedures and rules guiding this policy will be in accordance to the 'Policy of Non-
discrimination'.
If an individual is accused of sexual harassment but then it is not proven, a Warning
letter will still be sent to him/her stating that should this occur again, disciplinary action
including termination are possible. A record of the incident will be kept for future
reference
5.6.1 Sexual Assault Policy
USIU will not tolerate sexual assault in any form, including acquaintance rape. Sexual
assault is a violent crime and includes all forms of sexual contact carried out against the
will and without the consent of the victim or the consent is obtained by force or by means
of threats or intimidations of any kind.
Sexual Assault is defined as any involuntary sexual act in which a person is threatened,
coerced, or forced to comply against his/her will. These include: Rape, Acquaintance
Rape, Date Rape, Gang or Group Rape, forcible Fondling.
64
Sexual assault, rape, and sexual battery take place without the consent of the victim
where the assailant uses physical force, threat or intimidation to overpower and control
the victim; where the victim fears that self or another will be injured if he/her does not
submit; where the victim is prevented from resisting due to alcohol or drugs administered
by the assailant; or where consent is not freely given.
USIU is dedicated to providing timely and appropriate response when a sexual assault
occurs on campus. We also recognize the need of sexual assault victims to maintain
anonymity in the face of such an adverse experience. The highest level of anonymity and
confidentiality will be maintained at all times, consistent with national reporting
requirements.
Sexual assault is punishable through criminal and civil proceedings (refer to sexual
offence act No.3 of 2006). Even if the criminal justice authorities choose not to prosecute,
USIU can pursue disciplinary action. University sanctions include the possibility of
dismissal.
Verbal misconduct without accompanying physical contact is not defined as sexual
assault. Such conduct may constitute sexual harassment, which is also prohibited under
University regulations, as addressed in this Handbook and University Catalogue.
Consent is defined as positive co-operation. The person must act freely and voluntarily
and have knowledge of the nature of the act or transaction. A person may be incapable of
giving consent because of his/her youth or because of his/her temporary or permanent
mental incapacity. To constitute lack of consent, the act must be committed whether by
force, threat of force, intimidation, or through use of the victim's mental helplessness of
which the accused was aware or should have been aware. Mental helplessness includes
incapacitation by alcohol or other drugs.
Remember that there is a difference between consent and submission out of fear. If you
fear for your life, your physical safety, or for the life safety of a loved one, you may
sincerely believe that you have no other alternative than submit to a sexual act. This does
not mean that you have consented to it; submission is not consent.
What should you do if you are a victim of sexual assault?
Many victims of sexual assault don't know where to turn for help, or what to do. They
may be afraid or ashamed to talk to anyone, or they may try to act as if nothing has
happened.
65
If you have been sexually assaulted
Call the police at 999 or 112 on your mobile phone, or our Health and Counselling
Service at 230, 229, 311,246 or 297.
Sexual assault should be considered an emergency. Even if you do not have a single cut or
bruise you should report the assault.
What to do when you are raped:
Step 1
Ensure your personal safety by going to a safe place.
Step 2
 Do not take a shower or bath; do not clean your genitalia as this will destroy the
evidence.
 Do not throw away your clothes. Preserve evidence; if you change clothes wrap
them in a brown paper bag/newspaper (not a plastic bag).
 Avoid passing urine; if you have to, put the urine in a bottle and carry it to a
hospital.
 Do not brush your teeth or cut your nails.
Step 3
Seek medical assistance at the nearest hospital or health facility. The medical examination
has several purposes, which include caring for your needs (check for internal and external
trauma/injuries and test for sexually transmitted diseases) collecting medical evidence,
which will be used in court when an arrest has been made. It is essential that the
examination be performed as soon as possible after the assault.
 Get preventive treatment for HIV/AIDs, sexually transmitted infections, pregnancy
within 72 hours.
 Ensure that the Post Rape Care form is filled and take original and duplicate copies
with you.
Step 4
Step 5
It is important that you seek psychological support (counselling) to help you deal with the
impact of the assault on your life
66
Step 6
Seek legal redress.
5.7 HIV & AIDS POLICY
This policy serves as a guideline for handling issues pertaining to HIV and AIDS. It
symbolizes the collective dedication of the management, staff, faculty and students of
USIU, to managing the crisis through systematic planning and strategy. The vision,
mission, scope of application and values of the policy are as given below. A copy of the
policy document can be obtained from the university website.
5.7.1 The Scope of Application
Students
Faculty
Staff
Alumni
Community that interacts with USIU
Nuclear family members of staff, faculty and married students.
Outsourced service providers and contracted employees.
5.7.2 Vision:
United States International University will be an institution of higher learning free of
HIV and AIDS.
5.7.3 Mission:
To play a leadership role in the elimination of HIV and AIDS in USIU and its community
through prevention, control, care, support and development of knowledge by use of
selected high quality interventions including academic and social support programs.
In furtherance of the above, the university shall:
 Promote quality life through teaching and research in HIV and AIDS.
 Ensure equity within the USIU community.
 Integrate HIV and AIDS in the curriculum and Co curricula activities.
 Provide HIV and AIDS outreach programs to the community.
67
5.7.4 Values
The values that guide this policy are in accordance with International conventions,
national laws and policies; the existing USIU policies, regulations and guidelines. In
particular the values take into account gender issues, learners and employees with special
needs and recognize the universality of human rights.
These values are:-
a. Access to Education
The university will not deny any learner access to education on the basis of his / her
actual or perceived HIV status.
b. Access to Information
The university recognizes the right of every person to access relevant and factual HIV and
AIDS information, knowledge and skills that are appropriate to their age, gender, culture,
language and context.
c. Non-Discrimination
It is the policy of United States International University to provide equal education, and
employment opportunities without unlawful discrimination of any kind. Every person
has the same rights, opportunities and responsibilities and will be protected from all
forms of discrimination, including discrimination based on actual, known or perceived
HIV status.
d. Privacy and Confidentiality
The university recognizes the right of every person to privacy and confidentiality
regarding their health, including information related to their HIV status. USIU will not
require any person to undergo an HIV test. No person may disclose information relating
to the HIV status of another person, without his or her consent. However, health care
providers are allowed to disclose the HIV status of their patients to persons considered to
be at risk of infection after the individual has been provided enough opportunity to
disclose his / her HIV status to those concerned (Reference Sessional Paper No. 4. of 1997).
In the case of a minor, the best interest of the minor shall guide decisions concerning
disclosure. Every person has the right to know their HIV status and openness and
disclosure are encouraged within a safe, supportive and accepting environment. Every
person has a moral responsibility to protect themselves and others from HIV infection.
68
e. Access to Care, Treatment and Support
All infected and affected students and employees have the right to access holistic care,
treatment and support in line with available resources. USIU will work in partnership
with agencies offering support and care, including institutions, communities, private and
public health care systems.
f. Safety in the USIU Workplace and Learning Environment
United States International University is committed to minimizing the risk of HIV
transmission by taking appropriate first aid and universal infection control precautions.
g. Sexual Harassment
There will be zero tolerance for sexual harassment, abuse and exploitation as stipulated in
the Student, Faculty, Employee Handbooks and Catalogue.
h. Fair Labor Practices
The university recognizes that every person, whether infected or affected has the right to
fair labor practices in terms of recruitment, appointment and continued enjoyment of
employment, promotion, training and benefits. HIV testing as a requirement for any of
the above is prohibited.
i. Gender Responsiveness
HIV and AIDS affect and impact on women and men differently due to their biological,
socio-cultural and economic circumstances. USIU recognizes that the application of all
aspects of this policy should be responsive to the different needs of men and women, boys
and girls.
j. Involvement of People Living with AIDS (PLWA)
USIU will ensure the involvement of People Living with AIDS (PLWA), in the fight
against HIV and AIDS at all levels.
k. Partnerships
USIU will be responsible and accountable for the implementation of this policy; it will at
all times seek to develop effective partnerships to enhance the success of its
implementation.
NOTE: For details please visit the Counselling Center or consult the HIV and AIDS
policy document on the USIU website.
69
5.8 DISCLOSURE AND RELEASE OF STUDENT INFORMATION
The University affords students certain rights with respect to the records.
The right to inspect and review the student's educational or non-educational records,
within 45 days of the day the University receives a request for access.
The rights to request the amendment of the student's education records that the student
believes are inaccurate, misleading, or otherwise in violation of the student's privacy or
rights.
Students may ask the University to amend a record that they believe is inaccurate,
misleading or in violation of their privacy rights.
A student must write to the DVC Academic Affairs or the Vice Chancellor to amend a
record, clearly identify the part of the record to be amended and specify why it is
inaccurate, misleading or is in violation of the student's privacy or rights.
If the University decides not to amend the record as requested, the DVCAA or VICE
Chancellor will notify the student of the decision and inform the student of his or her
right to a hearing regarding the request for amendment. Additional information
regarding the hearing procedures will be provided the student when notified of the right
hearing.
One exception, which permits disclosure without consent, is disclosure to school officials
with legitimate educational interest. A school official is a person employed by the
University in an administrative, supervisory, academic or research, or support staff
position (including health staff positions); a person or company the University has
contracted (such as lawyer, auditor, collection agent, or security); a person serving on the
Board of Trustees; or a student serving on an official committee, such as a disciplinary or
grievance committee, or assisting another University official performing his or her task.
A University official has a legitimate educational interest if the official needs to review an
educational record in order to fulfil his or her professional responsibility.
Upon request, the University discloses educational records without consent to officials of
another school in which a student seek or intends to enrol. The University may also be
compelled to give information to legitimate Government authorities and courts of
competent jurisdiction.
70
6.0 ACADEMIC CODE OF CONDUCT AND ETHICS
The University is committed to principles of scholastic honesty. Its members are
expected to abide by ethical standards both in their conduct and in their exercise of
responsibility towards other members of the community.
This Academic Code of Conduct and Ethics is established to lend greater definition and
meaning to the principles of scholastic honesty and to outline standards, which will guide
the actions of the academic community. Any student who violates the Code of Conduct
and Ethics will be subject to sanctions up to and including dismissal from the University.
A student accused of a violation is guaranteed an impartial hearing and the right to an
appeal. Procedures and guidelines for the hearings and the appeals are described in this
section.
6.1 Students
As it is with other members of the academic community, each student's conduct is
expected to be in accordance with the standards of the University.
Students bear the responsibility not only for their own academic integrity, but also for
bringing instances of suspected violations of the Academic Code of Conduct to the
attention of the proper authorities.
6.2 Faculty and Administration
Faculty and administration are obligated to the University and to the students they teach
and serve to uphold ethical standards. They must deal fully and fairly with instances of
academic misconduct. Any evidence that a faculty member has intentionally acted in a
manner not consistent with this policy (including failures to report instances of suspected
misconduct) will be subject to a referral to the faculty member's dean for appropriate
action.
6.3 Acts of Misconduct
The Academic Code of Conduct and Ethics prohibits certain acts of misconduct by
students enrolled at University. Other University policies and procedures may also apply.
Depending on the circumstances, the acts of misconduct described below may be
considered as either a violation or an infraction.
6.3.1 Violations
71
The following acts are examples of violations.
Examination Behavior: any intentional giving or use of external assistance during an
examination without the express permission of the faculty member giving the
examination.
Fabrication: any falsification or invention of data, citation or other authority in an
academic exercise;
Plagiarism: any passing off of another's ideas, words, or work as one's own;
Unauthorized Collaboration: collaboration in any academic exercise unless the faculty
member has stated that such collaboration is permitted;
Theft of Resource Materials: any unauthorized taking of resource materials such as
course materials, library materials, computer software, media equipment;
Previously Submitted Work: presenting work prepared for and submitted to another
course;
Unauthorized Access: any unauthorized access to any person's files or computer
account;
Unauthorized Research: failure to obtain approval of the Institutional Review Board for
research involving human subjects;
Alteration or Misuse of University documents: any alteration or misuse of University
documents, including acts of forgery and/or furnishing false information;
Disruption of Academic Activity: disruptive behavior, wilful disobedience, profanity or
vulgarity, coming to class while under the influence of alcohol or the abuse of University
personnel, which continues after a warning, has been given; *
Acts or Threats of Damage to Property: acts or threats of abuse, misuse, damage, or
destruction of property belonging to or located on University controlled property or
facilities; *
Violation Defined by Faculty Member: any other intentional violation of rules or
policies established by a course faculty member/academic supervisor;
72
Serious violations marked with an asterisk* in the section above may be handled at the
discretion of the instructor within the policy of (non-academic) Student Code of
Conduct.
Depending on circumstances, acts of misconduct can also be treated as infractions, and
details and criteria for treating them as infractions can be found in the University
Catalogue. If in doubt, consult the DVC of Academic Affairs.
6.3.2 Procedures
The following procedures, including an appeal process, will be followed with respect to
suspected instances and allegations of academic misconduct.
Investigation:
When a lecturer or supervisor of an academic exercise directly observes or otherwise
determines (based on other evidence) that a violation of the Academic Code of Conduct
and Ethics has been committed. It is his/her responsibility to conduct as thorough and
reasonable an investigation as possible under circumstances. During this investigation
unless it is clear to the lecturer/supervisor that there has been no misconduct s/he must
promptly contact the student(s) suspected and provide an opportunity to discuss the
matter with the lecturer/supervisor in person.
Violation:
At this meeting, the student(s) must be advised of the findings of the initial investigation
and given an opportunity to respond. The lecturer/supervisor should then decide whether
an act of misconduct has occurred and, if so, whether it is a serious violation or an
infraction. Pending a final determination under these procedures, the lecturer gives a
grade of Incomplete.
Report to the Dean:
If a lecturer/supervisor decides that an act of misconduct has occurred, s/he must report
to the Dean of School as quickly as possible. The report to the Dean should include:
 A description of the suspected misconduct with specific date(s), time(s), and
circumstances;
 A summary of the investigation and the conclusions, with identification of any other
person(s) involved and witnesses if any;
73
 A note of any academic penalty that may have been imposed;
 A recommendation as to whether the suspected misconduct is a serious violation or
an infraction;
 Recommendation as to whether formal charges should be initiated;
 Recommendation of an appropriate sanction.
Determination by the Dean:
The Dean shall determine within two weeks from receipt of the report whether the
circumstances warrant the initiation of formal action of academic dishonesty.
A. If a sanction is determined to be necessary or inappropriate under the circumstances,
the Dean within 10 working days shall notify the lecturer/supervisor and the
student(s).
B. If a sanction is determined by the Dean to be necessary and appropriate under the
circumstances, the Dean shall notify the student within 10 working days and shall
provide the student with a copy of the report by the lecturer/supervisor. The student
shall be provided an opportunity to respond in writing and upon written request,
meet the Dean to discuss the allegations and the report. The Dean shall consider all
the material presented and make a determination as to whether an act of misconduct
has occurred, and whether it shall be considered a serious violation or an infraction.
6.3.3 Sanctions
Sanctions including expulsion from the University are imposed by the DVC Academic
Affairs. Suggested sanctions to be imposed when determination that an act of misconduct
of this policy has occurred include:
a) Infractions
4. Placement of 'conduct warning' letter in the student's educational record.
5. Placement of 'probation' letter in the student's educational record.
Note: Probationary status means that any subsequent violation of this policy will
result in an automatic application of the sanctions imposed in cases of serious
violations (see below).
b) Serious Violations
1.
74
2. Suspension from class for the remainder of the semester.
3. Suspension from the University by the DVC Academic Affairs for a semester or more
with no transcript notation;
4. Expulsion from the University by the DVC Academic Affairs with no transcript
notation;
5. Expulsion from the University by the DVC Academic Affairs with transcript notation
indicating, 'Academic conduct dismissal'. *
6. Restitution - compensation for loss, damage, or injury. This may take the form of
appropriate service or monetary/material replacement or both.
c) Educational Records
The record of the final determination in all cases will be maintained in the educational
record of the student in the office of the Dean for a period of five years. The student may
submit a request to the DVC Academic Affairs for removal of the transcript notation of
'Academic Dismissal Conduct' after three years. The decision of the Dean, with respect to
such request of removal shall be final.
6.4 Appeal
Students wishing to appeal the determination by the Dean may request for a mediation
session. The persons involved in mediation shall be the DVC Academic Affairs, the DVC
Student Affairs, the lecturer/supervisor and the student(s). The student may bring a
friend or family member for support.
If no acceptable solution is reached in the mediation, the DVC shall, upon request from
the affected student(s), appoint an appeal board to hear the appeal as expeditiously as
possible. An appeal board shall consist of a faculty member, an administrator, and two
students. One member of the board is appointed by the DVC to chair the hearing and
ensure that proper procedures are followed.
As expeditiously as possible, the board will review the case and schedule a hearing in
which the student(s) accused of misconduct will have the right to ask questions of the
instructor and witness if any. The appeal board will submit a report of its findings to the
DVC Academic Affairs within five (5) working days of the end of its deliberations. The
75
decision of the appeal board and the sanction(s) imposed is final. Full details of the
procedures for hearing are given in the University Catalogue.
76
